Short Prose Dream 20201222102825412352

To take the tray from her, set it on the floor, put his arm through hers, and walk her slowly up and down in the corner of the passage. Why should he have concerned himself about me, or better, how could he in any case have concerned himself about me He knew^nothing about me by that time. But it's next thing to madness to imagine that Klamm could have given me Hans as a husband simply that I might have no great difficulty in going to him if he should summon me sometime again. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. But now Til have to tlirn them out myself." She took a whip from a corner and sprang among the dancers with a single bound, a little uncertainly, as a young lamb might spring. 
In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. And when now, after finishing his work in the shed, the coachman went across the courtyard in his slow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and then returned, all very slowly, while he literally looked at nothing but his own footprints in the snow f_" and finally shut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electric lights went out too f_" for whom should they remain on f_" and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery still remained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for a little, it seemed to K. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. But here f_" look, there are the assistants It's not you they think of when they clasp their hands, but me." " And it's not I who am looking at them," said K., " but you." " Certainly, me," said Frieda almost angrily, " that's what I've been saying all the time ; why else should they be always at my heels, even if they are messengers of Klamm's '   f_o Messengers of Klamm's " repeated K. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. 
But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. And Frieda, and when he was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively and confidential and began to question them eagerly and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to an independent decision about what they should do. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. 
All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Would have had the satisfaction of having organised everything properly to the best of his knowledge, whereas to-day he should have been on his guard against the landlady's interference and yet had done nothing to protect himself from it. But only think, they don't want to go away, they know it's a miserable life they lead there, but they have resigned themselves to it, good souls, I think their tears as we said goodbye were mostly because they were sad about my having to leave our common room, going out into the cold f_" to us there everything seems cold that is outside the room f_" and having to make my way in the big strange rooms with big strange people, for no other purpose than to earn a living, which after all I had ^ managed to do up to now in the life we led together. F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. 



The room is unfortunately, as I only now see, not so carefully prepared as I should have wished. " Alas," the girl said and smiled f_" she looked both confiding and aloof f_" " nobody comes, it is as though the world had forgotten us." " Why should anyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, is there anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowly witjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. 

Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. In general the letter means nothing more than that Klamm intends to take a personal interest in you if you should be taken into the state service." " Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letter so well that nothing remains of it but a signature on a blank sheet of paper. 
" But,' Frieda went   on, f_o even if everything were disproved, what would be gained by that, what would it matter to me What happens in that house is purely their business and his business, no tmine. 
This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. 
Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Is there any reason why it should be different in the Castle Somebody pointed out that particular official to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually a resemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. But there would have been   a big difference between having the Central Bureau, or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on his account in the middle of the night by an insistent although ostensibly humble request for an immediate decision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probably not in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. So there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to nothing when one takes into account that the test for the official appointments is very stringent and that a member of any doubtful family is turned down in advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling for the result, from the very first day everybody asks him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping f_" how else cjjfuld he keep alive f_" then after years and years, perhaps as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, learns that everything is lost and that all his life has been in vain. Repeated, and the weariness he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had commanded  that they should stay with her He could quite well have found his own way home, and better done, in- deed, than in this company. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. 
The bunk downstairs in the maidsf_T room is waiting for her, she will come m, welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly hidden and wonf_Tt be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times better forgotten. That is unfortunately true, I did neglect her, but there were special reascttis for that, which have nothing to do with this discussion ; I should be happy if she were to come back to me, but I should at once begin to neglect her all over again. Why should I get on better than they do For that was f_> just what held us together, the fact that the future was barred to all three of us in the same way, and now I have broken through after all and was separated from them. 
Why should he have concerned himself about me, or better, how could he in any case have concerned himself about me He knew^nothing about me by that time. To comfort her assured her that he would go immediately to the village Super- intendent and demand that it should be replaced, and see that this was done, was she able to gather herself together sufficiently to run out of their stockade in her chemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at least from being stained any more. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. " I should like to spend the night here," said K. Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed on account of the allair wurli the letter?f__ K. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. I think on the other hand that it was entirely his work that we found each other under the bar counter, we should bless that hour and not curse it." " If that is so," said K. 
" Alas," the girl said and smiled f_" she looked both confiding and aloof f_" " nobody comes, it is as though the world had forgotten us." " Why should anyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, is there anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowly witjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. And when now, after finishing his work in the shed, the coachman went across the courtyard in his slow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and then returned, all very slowly, while he literally looked at nothing but his own footprints in the snow f_" and finally shut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electric lights went out too f_" for whom should they remain on f_" and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery still remained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for a little, it seemed to K. That's as it should be and dt's certainly Klamm's will. 

If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. Perhaps, my dear Land   Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he should have been moved at least to make enquiries the other departments about the affair. Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. All that still sti;ikes me as queer is the fact that such things should ever have been meant to be made the basis of an interrogation and that even Klamm's name should have been misused for that purpose." " If I were your enemy," the Itfhd- lady said, " I could not have wished for anything better   than that you should take such a view of this f_o Ah yes,f_T' K. And if they could, I should not have the capacity to follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximity would rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. " He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. 
Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. 
Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. Then he sat down in a corner and  Z neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had to attend to the last people there by ourselves as well as we could/* And where do you see in all this the influence of the Castle asked K. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. K., startled out of his weariness by the new surroundings and Erlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtle dillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the f_~   schoolmasterf_" outwardly, too, there were litric points of resemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair ,ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and to left were absent that day f_" ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' as possible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcr had been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturb him he had gone away, then, of course, passed over in silence what he had been doing in the meantime, resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihs confusing the doors, and concluded by referring to his extraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be taken into consideration. But only think, they don't want to go away, they know it's a miserable life they lead there, but they have resigned themselves to it, good souls, I think their tears as we said goodbye were mostly because they were sad about my having to leave our common room, going out into the cold f_" to us there everything seems cold that is outside the room f_" and having to make my way in the big strange rooms with big strange people, for no other purpose than to earn a living, which after all I had ^ managed to do up to now in the life we led together. F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. " Do you think he does it for the money " " Maybe he does," said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented " " He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga, " but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service, at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K., " do you even doubt that " "Well," said Olga, " not really, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is accepted by the attendants as one of themselves, he sees various olficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela- tively important letters, even with verbally delivered messages, that's a good deal, after all, and we should be proud of what he has achieved for a young man of his years." K. We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. 


Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. 
How should files come to be there What did the maids care about files But the outcome was always the same^ abuse and threats uttered by the disappointed commission and passed on by the landlord. For whom should they smarten themselves Nobody saw them, at best the staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough was welcome to smarten herself. 
Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. 
And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. Yet the question of the erection of a waiting-room outside seemed to be nearing a favourable solution ; but it was really a sharp blow for the landlady f_" people laughed a little over it f_" that this matter of a waiting-room should itself make innumerable interviews necessary, so that the lobbies of the house were hardly ever empty. He asked why this was so and got the answer that they should be only too thankful to Erlanger. To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. F_oI should step in his way and compel him to hear me.f__ f_oCompel him to hear you the landlady said. 
" Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. 
Itf_Ts completely out of the question of course that I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterly improbable thing should happen after all and I should go to sleep while you are still here, then please stay quiet and don't open the door, either. 
Nor did the letter pass over the feet that if it should come to a struggle K. 
Do you think itf_Ts you I'm anxious about Did I bother about you in the least so long as you were by yourself Even though it would jiave been a good thing and saved a lot of trouble The only thing I ever said to my husband about you was : ' Keep your distance where he's concerned.' And I should have done that myself to this very day if Frieda hadn't got mixed up with, your affairs. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. And speaking confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything in common with the village, even although his dark clothes looked like a peasant's finery. And even if their information were no more reliable than that of the man who pointed out Klamm of his own accord, there would be surely some common ground, some ground for comparison, in the various things they said. And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. Later on we pieced it all together for our- selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straight tO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account had stayed in the village instead, and in the morning, being very angry because even overnight he hadn't succeeded in forgetting her, had written the letter. 
That everything should be lost is yet more improbable than the most improbable thing itself. For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. 

"You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. And on the ground floor, but in the corner where the opposite wing of the house joined the main building, there was an entrance to the house, open, and without a door. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. 
Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. 
But it's next thing to madness to imagine that Klamm could have given me Hans as a husband simply that I might have no great difficulty in going to him if he should summon me sometime again. Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. This must not be allowed to happen, even if the landlord and the landlady should unite against him. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. No one should deprive him of that now. And so that all should know what it was all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the outcome was certain. 
The bunk downstairs in the maidsf_T room is waiting for her, she will come m, welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly hidden and wonf_Tt be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times better forgotten. 
With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. Perhaps, my dear Land   Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he should have been moved at least to make enquiries the other departments about the affair. The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. 
With us here things are quite certainlj not in such a way that an expert employee should be lefi unused. Without knowing anything of the circumstances under' which K.*s appointment had come about, of the difficulties that it encountered in the community and at the Castle, of the complications that had already occurred during K.*s sojourn here or had been foreshadowed, without knowing anything of all this, indeed without even showing, what should have been expected of a secretary as a matter of course, that he had at least itn inkling of it all, he offered to settle the whole affair up there in no time at all with the aid of his little note-pad. He did not even have to ask that the room should be  l cleared, for all the men flocked out with averted faces lest he should recognise them again next day. Do you really think, Frieda, I should have opened the door for you, making the way free for you " P. But I have heard grave complaints about you, on account of your behaviour this morning.f__ f__ Hef_Ts improving,f__ Gisa said, without i^lancing at K. " I can't believe that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you're right," said K., " but he's the only messenger that's sent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda, f_o all the more reason why you should beware of him." " Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that till now," said K. Was stamping through the snow outside f_" the path should have been shovelled free long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- ward f_" he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, still holding to the railings. But although she doesn't bother about us we're as dependent on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise   us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice, only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. 
Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. But Olga's invitation to spend the night there and wait for Barnabas he declined, for himself he might perhaps have accepted fof it was already late in the night and it seemed to him that now, whether he wanted it or not, he was bound to this family in such a way that a bed for the night here, though for many reasons painful, nevertheless, when one considered this common bond, was the most suitable for him in the village ; all the same he declined it, the assistant's visit had alarmed him, it was incomprehensible to him how Frieda, who knew his wishes quite well, and the assist- ants, who had learned to fear him, had come together again like this, so that Frieda didn't scruple to send an assistant for him, only one of them, too, while the other had probably remained to keep her company. Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. Later on we pieced it all together for our- selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straight tO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account had stayed in the village instead, and in the morning, being very angry because even overnight he hadn't succeeded in forgetting her, had written the letter. The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. I don't know why he should seem a passionate person in your eyes. I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. 
I should like to see her again." To diminish the effect of what he said, K. Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. That's as it should be and dt's certainly Klamm's will. Certainly, Klamm will never speak to anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter   how much trouble this anybody may take, and no matter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I that fact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, never allow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself : why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endure seeing this anybody At any rate, it can't be proved, seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle- man nodded eagerly. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. 

Later on we pieced it all together for our- selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straight tO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account had stayed in the village instead, and in the morning, being very angry because even overnight he hadn't succeeded in forgetting her, had written the letter. Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. 
The applicant wrings from us in the night, as the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the \vL)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official   power f_" that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, wc are happy. In general the letter means nothing more than that Klamm intends to take a personal interest in you if you should be taken into the state service." " Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letter so well that nothing remains of it but a signature on a blank sheet of paper. " Perhaps you know him, Mizzi You don't know him either No, we don't know him." " That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of the under-castellans." " My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin- tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons of all the under-castellans "   " Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take my word that he is one. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. It was as it should be then, only the grounds for it were obscure. Why should he have concerned himself about me, or better, how could he in any case have concerned himself about me He knew^nothing about me by that time. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. And speaking confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything in common with the village, even although his dark clothes looked like a peasant's finery. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 

F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. Mizzi," he called, and then : f_o But what are you doing f__   the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had clearly not found the paper they were looking for, and had then tried to shut everything up again in the cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- abundance of papers had not succeeded. 
" He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. It was as it should be then, only the grounds for it were obscure. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. Then he sat down in a corner and  Z neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had to attend to the last people there by ourselves as well as we could/* And where do you see in all this the influence of the Castle asked K. " Alas," the girl said and smiled f_" she looked both confiding and aloof f_" " nobody comes, it is as though the world had forgotten us." " Why should anyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, is there anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowly witjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. Must not wait near the house f_" again it was sensitiveness on his mother's account that dictated his reaction f_" K. Away, or even say, what went after all without saying, that he should at long last go away; none of them would do that, although during the period of K/s presence they were probably trembling with agitation and the morning, their favourite time, was being ruined for them. Had he then not noticed under what difficulties fhc distribution of files had proceeded, some- thing in itself incomprehensible, since after all each of the gentlemen served only the cause, never thinking of his personal advantage and hence being obliged to exert all his powers to seeing that the distribution of the files, this important, fundamental, preliminary work, should proceed quickly and easily and without any mistakes And had K. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. 

I know a great many of the servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's servants who have come to the village during the last two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't be a stranger there. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. 

Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. " He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. Our mother was the feeblest of us dl, probably because she had not only endured our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. Now, you should have seen Amalia at that time. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. He looked at the clock, and said : f_T My assistants should be arriving soon. To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. And when now, after finishing his work in the shed, the coachman went across the courtyard in his slow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and then returned, all very slowly, while he literally looked at nothing but his own footprints in the snow f_" and finally shut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electric lights went out too f_" for whom should they remain on f_" and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery still remained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for a little, it seemed to K. That's as it should be and dt's certainly Klamm's will. 
But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. Nor did the letter pass over the feet that if it should come to a struggle K. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. 

Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedly assured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor and to take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit of this intention, although with a good deal of whispering and giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselves into a smaller compass, crouching together in the corner so that in the dim light they looked like one large bundle. 


You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. 
I think on the other hand that it was entirely his work that we found each other under the bar counter, we should bless that hour and not curse it." " If that is so," said K. Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. And Frieda, and when he was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively and confidential and began to question them eagerly and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to an independent decision about what they should do. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Certainly, Klamm will never speak to anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter   how much trouble this anybody may take, and no matter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I that fact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, never allow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself : why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endure seeing this anybody At any rate, it can't be proved, seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle- man nodded eagerly. Had no prcjper appreciation of it ; he, who with all his powers strove to get a glimpse of Klamm, valued very little, for example, the post of a Momus who was permitted to live in Klamm 's eye ; for it was not Klamm's environ- ment in itself that seemed to him worth striving for, but rather that he, K., he only and no one else, should attain to Klamm, and should attain to him not, to rest with him, but to go on beyond him, f_~farther yet, into the Castle. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. 
You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. Itf_Ts completely out of the question of course that I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterly improbable thing should happen after all and I should go to sleep while you are still here, then please stay quiet and don't open the door, either. " Perhaps you know him, Mizzi You don't know him either No, we don't know him." " That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of the under-castellans." " My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin- tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons of all the under-castellans "   " Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take my word that he is one. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. 

If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. Had never yet heard, of his downward-pressing gaze, which could never be proved or disproved, of liis wheelings   which could never be disturbed by anything that K. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. 
Before we could dare to reproach her we should first of all have to have an inkling of how she suflers. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. 
-- But after a moment he regained his composure and said : ** My master wishes to know when he is to come   to the Castle to-morrow/' The answer : ** Tell your master, but do not forget a single word of the incss^igc : Even if he sends ten assistants to ask when he is to come he will always get the answer : Neither to-morrow nor at any other time." K. At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. " On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre- taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguard themselves, within the terms of the regulations, against the night interrogations and their perhaps only apparent disadvantages. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. " I can't believe that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you're right," said K., " but he's the only messenger that's sent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda, f_o all the more reason why you should beware of him." " Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that till now," said K. Was stamping through the snow outside f_" the path should have been shovelled free long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- ward f_" he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, still holding to the railings. 
You marvel, perhaps, that this, although it seems to be so obvious, should happen so very seldom. Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. Had never yet heard, of his downward-pressing gaze, which could never be proved or disproved, of liis wheelings   which could never be disturbed by anything that K. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. Not in ever thing, I won't say that you justify her in everythir for was it not on my account alone that you sent t assistants packing Oh, if you but knew with wl passion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself in that you do and say, even when it gives me pair " Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal  the slightest thing from you. 
F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. 

Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Such negotiations lasted a very long time, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentleman would perhaps hand over part of the files or get other files as compensation, since all that had happened was that a mistake had been made ; but it also happened sometimes that someone simply had to abandon all the files demanded, either because he had been driven into a corner by the servant's evidence or because he was tired of the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not give rlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flung them out into the passage, so that the strings came undone and the papers flew about and the servants had a great deal of trouble getting everything straight again. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. And speaking confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything in common with the village, even although his dark clothes looked like a peasant's finery. But although she doesn't bother about us we're as dependent on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise   us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice, only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. 
C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. And Frieda, and when he was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively and confidential and began to question them eagerly and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to an independent decision about what they should do. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Nor did the letter pass over the feet that if it should come to a struggle K. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. So there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to nothing when one takes into account that the test for the official appointments is very stringent and that a member of any doubtful family is turned down in advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling for the result, from the very first day everybody asks him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping f_" how else cjjfuld he keep alive f_" then after years and years, perhaps as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, learns that everything is lost and that all his life has been in vain. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. 
" Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. And in comparison with that is it so monstrous that Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations with women are at least unknown, should condescend for once to write in his beautiful official hand a letter, however abominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here in Klamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's love for him establish one The relation existing between the women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult, or rather very easy to determine. If she had suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy with Amalia. You're certainly making it much worse than it is with such womanish fussing." Amalia's Secret " Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why it should be of any importance. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. I know a great many of the servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's servants who have come to the village during the last two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't be a stranger there. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. 
Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. 
Nor did the letter pass over the feet that if it should come to a struggle K. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 


The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. Now, you should have seen Amalia at that time. Would only have to show himself and remind her of all that spoke in his favour, and she would rue it and come back to him, especially if he should be in a position to justify his visit to those girls by some success due entirely to them. Tell him that it's very important that I should speak to him." Suddenly Jeremiah set off at a run. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Left entirely to hen She sent them to her old friends, reminded people of her existence, complained that she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incited people against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival, begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing to Klamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to be spared and as if for this reason he must on no account be allowed to come down into tap-room. What she represented to one as a way of sparing Klammf_Ts feelings she succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlord was concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klamm did not come any more. " He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. 
And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. And on the ground floor, but in the corner where the opposite wing of the house joined the main building, there was an entrance to the house, open, and without a door. Itf_Ts completely out of the question of course that I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterly improbable thing should happen after all and I should go to sleep while you are still here, then please stay quiet and don't open the door, either. With us here things are quite certainlj not in such a way that an expert employee should be lefi unused. 
Our mother was the feeblest of us dl, probably because she had not only endured our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. No one should deprive him of that now. 
But I have heard grave complaints about you, on account of your behaviour this morning.f__ f__ Hef_Ts improving,f__ Gisa said, without i^lancing at K. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. Is there any reason why it should be different in the Castle Somebody pointed out that particular official to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually a resemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. But I repeated everything to Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he still had no capacity whatever to distinguish between what was true and what was false, and on account of the TMfi CASTLfi ^} family position was almost famishing to hear all these things ; and he drank in everything and burned with eagerness for more. 
Although I donf_Tt belong to the Castle, and am only a woman, only a landlady here in an inn of the lowest kind f_" itf_Ts not of the very lowest but not far from it f_" and on that account you may not perhaps set much store by my explanation, still If_Tve kept my eyes open all my life and met many kinds of people and taken the whole burden of the inn on my own shoulders, for Martin is no landlord although hef_Ts a good man, and responsi- bility is a tiling hef_Tll never understand. So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. I know a great many of the servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's servants who have come to the village during the last two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't be a stranger there. Even now the landlord of the Herrenhof himself came hastening along from far off, dressed in black and buttoned up as always ;   but it was as though he were forgetful of his dignity, he was in such a hurry ; his arms were half outspread, just as if he liad been called on account of some great disaster and were coming in order to take hold of it and instantly smother it against his chest, and at every little irregularity in the ringing he seemed briefly to leap into the air and hurry on faster still. If he was summoned by one of the gentlemen, he had, of course, to appear in the place to which he was summoned, but had to remain always aware f_" surely he at least had some ordinary common sense f_" that he was in a place where he actually did not belong, a place whither he had only been summoned by one of the gentlemen, and that with extreme reluctance and only because it was necessitated by ofEcial business. The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. 
The applicant wrings from us in the night, as the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the \vL)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official   power f_" that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, wc are happy. 

Then he sat down in a corner and  Z neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had to attend to the last people there by ourselves as well as we could/* And where do you see in all this the influence of the Castle asked K. F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. " Do you think he does it for the money " " Maybe he does," said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented " " He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga, " but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service, at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K., " do you even doubt that " "Well," said Olga, " not really, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is accepted by the attendants as one of themselves, he sees various olficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela- tively important letters, even with verbally delivered messages, that's a good deal, after all, and we should be proud of what he has achieved for a young man of his years." K. We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. What she represented to one as a way of sparing Klammf_Ts feelings she succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlord was concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klamm did not come any more. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. 

I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. Wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm f__ Olga laughed out loud. But now Til have to tlirn them out myself." She took a whip from a corner and sprang among the dancers with a single bound, a little uncertainly, as a young lamb might spring. Tell him that it's very important that I should speak to him." Suddenly Jeremiah set off at a run. It was incompre- hensible to her why there should need to be clients waiting at all. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. 
The applicant wrings from us in the night, as the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the \vL)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official   power f_" that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, wc are happy. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. But then, I thought again that it was impossible that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, than in other words all that I did should be turned down in advance without further examination. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. *Itf_Ts voluntary, of course, the work he does here.f__ f__ Then it would be better if he just slept on,f__ said Gerstacker, f__ for when he has a little time left for his work after he wakes, hef_Ts very vexed at having fallen asleep, and tries to get everything settled in a hurry, so that one can   hardly get a word in." " Youf_Tve come on account of the contract for the carting for* the new building " asked the servant. To take the tray from her, set it on the floor, put his arm through hers, and walk her slowly up and down in the corner of the passage. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. And theref_Ts just one thing, one thing my poor head canf_Tt understand, that a girl who had the honour of being known as Klammf_Ts mistress f_" a wild exaggeration in my opinion f_" should have allowed you even to lay a finger on her.f__ f__ Most certainly, thatf_Ts remarkable,f__ said K., drawing Frieda to his bosom f_" she submitted at once although with bent head f_" f__ but in my opinion that only proves the possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. 
So there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to nothing when one takes into account that the test for the official appointments is very stringent and that a member of any doubtful family is turned down in advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling for the result, from the very first day everybody asks him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping f_" how else cjjfuld he keep alive f_" then after years and years, perhaps as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, learns that everything is lost and that all his life has been in vain. 

Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. Then we should have lost you, and I confess that now you mean almost more to me than Barnabas's service in the Castle. 
We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. A school janitor was an important person to the rest of the stafff_" and should have been especially so to such an assistant as Schwarzer f_" a person not to be lightly despised, who should at lea^ be suitably f_>conciliated if professional considerations were not enough to prevent one from despising him. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. If the two of us were alone, it would not be di/hculf to agree, I should soon be of one mind v\'ith you, )'ou are unselfish and intelligent ; only W'c are nor alone ; indeed we, are not even the main persons, your family is there, about which we shall scarcely manage to agree, and ab<|ut Amalia we shall certainly not.f__ f_o You condemn f_>f_~^malia entirely?f__ Olga asked. Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. The applicant wrings from us in the night, as the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the \vL)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official   power f_" that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, wc are happy. Go along, what are you still doing here  No, you don't need to apologise for being sleepy, why should you  One's physical energies last only to a certain limit. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. If you delay much longer Erlanger will be down on me, and that is something I should very much like to avoid. 
You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. And he certainly never gave me this post so that I and my dependents should freeze here, but f_" as you told me yourself f_" to keep me from doing anything thoughtless or desperate. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. It seems so to uc^ that does not mean fie is uneasyf_" how should uneasiness touch him? " Alas," the girl said and smiled f_" she looked both confiding and aloof f_" " nobody comes, it is as though the world had forgotten us." " Why should anyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, is there anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowly witjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. 

" Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. 

Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. 

But the Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this post would keep you out of difficulties, and that conse- quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ; he suggested further, that along with you we would obtain the services of your wife and your assistants, so that the school should be kept in first-rate order, and not only it, but the school-garden as well. But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. She didn't need any money in her job, she managed by means of lying and trickery, this was^an example Pepi did not want to and could not imitate, and that was why it was justifiable that she should smarten herself up like this in order to get herself thoroughly noticed right at the beginning. 
Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. 
Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. So there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to nothing when one takes into account that the test for the official appointments is very stringent and that a member of any doubtful family is turned down in advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling for the result, from the very first day everybody asks him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping f_" how else cjjfuld he keep alive f_" then after years and years, perhaps as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, learns that everything is lost and that all his life has been in vain. 
Was stamping through the snow outside f_" the path should have been shovelled free long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- ward f_" he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, still holding to the railings. 

Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. Not in ever thing, I won't say that you justify her in everythir for was it not on my account alone that you sent t assistants packing Oh, if you but knew with wl passion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself in that you do and say, even when it gives me pair " Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal  the slightest thing from you. Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. 

Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. Her favourite seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, well, there she sat and f_" we couldn't tell exactly what was wrong f_" used to doze or carry on long conversa- tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her lips. Where should it hang if not over the table and yet they found it insupportable. Sordini countered : ' Why had I only mentioned this official order now ' I replied : f_~ Because I had just remembered it.' Sordini : f_~ That was very extra- ordinary.' Myself : f_~ It was not in the least extra- ordinary in such a long-drawn-out business.' Sordini ; f_~ Yes, it was extraordinary, for the order that I remem- bered didn't exist.' Myself : ' Of course it didn't exist, for the whole document had gone a-missing.' Sordini : f_~ But there must be a memorandum extant relating to this first communication, and there wasn't one extant.' That drew me up, for that an error should happen in Sordini's department I neither dared to maintain nor to believe. Perhaps, my dear Land   Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he should have been moved at least to make enquiries the other departments about the affair. 

Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. 
Go along, what are you still doing here  No, you don't need to apologise for being sleepy, why should you  One's physical energies last only to a certain limit. If you delay much longer Erlanger will be down on me, and that is something I should very much like to avoid. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. To comfort her assured her that he would go immediately to the village Super- intendent and demand that it should be replaced, and see that this was done, was she able to gather herself together sufficiently to run out of their stockade in her chemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at least from being stained any more. Not in ever thing, I won't say that you justify her in everythir for was it not on my account alone that you sent t assistants packing Oh, if you but knew with wl passion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself in that you do and say, even when it gives me pair " Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal  the slightest thing from you. " Perhaps you know him, Mizzi You don't know him either No, we don't know him." " That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of the under-castellans." " My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin- tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons of all the under-castellans "   " Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take my word that he is one. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. 

K., startled out of his weariness by the new surroundings and Erlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtle dillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the f_~   schoolmasterf_" outwardly, too, there were litric points of resemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair ,ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and to left were absent that day f_" ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' as possible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcr had been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturb him he had gone away, then, of course, passed over in silence what he had been doing in the meantime, resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihs confusing the doors, and concluded by referring to his extraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be taken into consideration. 
For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. But before I go into that I beg you, donf_Tt let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds domineering,  am no more domineering than I am inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way I should like to be treated myself." " How like a stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were much nearer to us before, were you not Your reserva- tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted )'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard to me either.f__ " If I speak diflerently from before," K. Said, " that is because I want to be even nearer to you all than before, I want to be at home among you, cither I shall attach myself to you in this way or | not at all, either we shall make entirely common cause, with regard to Barnabas or we shall avoid even evefy tlecting, objectively unnecessary contact that w^Duld   compromise me and perhaps all of you too. And if they could, I should not have the capacity to follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximity would rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. Do you really think, Frieda, I should have opened the door for you, making the way free for you " P. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. It was as it should be then, only the grounds for it were obscure. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Said, " that is because I want to be even nearer to you all than before, I want to be at home among you, cither I shall attach myself to you in this way or | not at all, either we shall make entirely common cause, with regard to Barnabas or we shall avoid even evefy tlecting, objectively unnecessary contact that w^Duld   compromise me and perhaps all of you too. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. But the Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this post would keep you out of difficulties, and that conse- quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ; he suggested further, that along with you we would obtain the services of your wife and your assistants, so that the school should be kept in first-rate order, and not only it, but the school-garden as well. We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. 
He looked at the clock, and said : f_T My assistants should be arriving soon. If the two of us were alone, it would not be di/hculf to agree, I should soon be of one mind v\'ith you, )'ou are unselfish and intelligent ; only W'c are nor alone ; indeed we, are not even the main persons, your family is there, about which we shall scarcely manage to agree, and ab<|ut Amalia we shall certainly not.f__ f_o You condemn f_>f_~^malia entirely?f__ Olga asked. Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. It concerned itself about the common welfare, of course, but it couldn't simply interfere with the natural course of events for the sole purpose of serving the interest of one man. You're certainly making it much worse than it is with such womanish fussing." Amalia's Secret " Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why it should be of any importance. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. If the two of us were alone, it would not be di/hculf to agree, I should soon be of one mind v\'ith you, )'ou are unselfish and intelligent ; only W'c are nor alone ; indeed we, are not even the main persons, your family is there, about which we shall scarcely manage to agree, and ab<|ut Amalia we shall certainly not.f__ f_o You condemn f_>f_~^malia entirely?f__ Olga asked. A school janitor was an important person to the rest of the stafff_" and should have been especially so to such an assistant as Schwarzer f_" a person not to be lightly despised, who should at lea^ be suitably f_>conciliated if professional considerations were not enough to prevent one from despising him. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. Why should I have come asked K. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. He did not even have to ask that the room should be  l cleared, for all the men flocked out with averted faces lest he should recognise them again next day. He looked at the clock, and said : f_T My assistants should be arriving soon. Must not wait near the house f_" again it was sensitiveness on his mother's account that dictated his reaction f_" K. -- But after a moment he regained his composure and said : ** My master wishes to know when he is to come   to the Castle to-morrow/' The answer : ** Tell your master, but do not forget a single word of the incss^igc : Even if he sends ten assistants to ask when he is to come he will always get the answer : Neither to-morrow nor at any other time." K. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. 
" I should like to have a bit of a look at it," K. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. I know a great many of the servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's servants who have come to the village during the last two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't be a stranger there. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Mizzi," he called, and then : f_o But what are you doing f__   the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had clearly not found the paper they were looking for, and had then tried to shut everything up again in the cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- abundance of papers had not succeeded. It was as it should be then, only the grounds for it were obscure. 

Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. Said, " that is because I want to be even nearer to you all than before, I want to be at home among you, cither I shall attach myself to you in this way or | not at all, either we shall make entirely common cause, with regard to Barnabas or we shall avoid even evefy tlecting, objectively unnecessary contact that w^Duld   compromise me and perhaps all of you too. Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed on account of the allair wurli the letter?f__ K. 
" He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. This must not be allowed to happen, even if the landlord and the landlady should unite against him. Secretary," asked K., " read the protocol " "No," replied Momus, " why should he Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. 

Tell him that it's very important that I should speak to him." Suddenly Jeremiah set off at a run. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. To take the tray from her, set it on the floor, put his arm through hers, and walk her slowly up and down in the corner of the passage. 
"You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. To comfort her assured her that he would go immediately to the village Super- intendent and demand that it should be replaced, and see that this was done, was she able to gather herself together sufficiently to run out of their stockade in her chemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at least from being stained any more. " I should like to spend the night here," said K. I don't know why he should seem a passionate person in your eyes. I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. You can see Frieda's merits very well for yourself, you notice her power of observation, her resolution, her influence on people, only you do, of course, interpret it all wrongly, believing she turns everything self-seekingly to account only for her own benefit and for evil purposes, or even as a weapon against you. Why should I get on better than they do For that was f_> just what held us together, the fact that the future was barred to all three of us in the same way, and now I have broken through after all and was separated from them. I don't know why he should seem a passionate person in your eyes. I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. " Do you think he does it for the money " " Maybe he does," said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented " " He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga, " but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service, at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K., " do you even doubt that " "Well," said Olga, " not really, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is accepted by the attendants as one of themselves, he sees various olficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela- tively important letters, even with verbally delivered messages, that's a good deal, after all, and we should be proud of what he has achieved for a young man of his years." K. We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. And if they could, I should not have the capacity to follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximity would rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. 



He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. 
And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. 
The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. 
So there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to nothing when one takes into account that the test for the official appointments is very stringent and that a member of any doubtful family is turned down in advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling for the result, from the very first day everybody asks him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping f_" how else cjjfuld he keep alive f_" then after years and years, perhaps as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, learns that everything is lost and that all his life has been in vain. But I repeated everything to Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he still had no capacity whatever to distinguish between what was true and what was false, and on account of the TMfi CASTLfi ^} family position was almost famishing to hear all these things ; and he drank in everything and burned with eagerness for more. Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. To comfort her assured her that he would go immediately to the village Super- intendent and demand that it should be replaced, and see that this was done, was she able to gather herself together sufficiently to run out of their stockade in her chemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at least from being stained any more. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. No longer in her house ; if he had connections with the Castle, then he should take advantage of them at once, for he must leave the house that very day, that very minute, and she would only take him back again at the express order and command of the authorities ; but she hoped it would not come to that, for she too had connections with the Castle and f_>would know how to make use of them. Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. " I can't believe that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you're right," said K., " but he's the only messenger that's sent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda, f_o all the more reason why you should beware of him." " Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that till now," said K. Was stamping through the snow outside f_" the path should have been shovelled free long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- ward f_" he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, still holding to the railings. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. And so that all should know what it was all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the outcome was certain. " I should like to spend the night here," said K. 

So what should one smarten oneself up for Yes, one scarcely bothered to dress at all. But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. 
He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. 
Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. 
The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. All that still sti;ikes me as queer is the fact that such things should ever have been meant to be made the basis of an interrogation and that even Klamm's name should have been misused for that purpose." " If I were your enemy," the Itfhd- lady said, " I could not have wished for anything better   than that you should take such a view of this f_o Ah yes,f_T' K. And if they could, I should not have the capacity to follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximity would rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. And if they could, I should not have the capacity to follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximity would rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. Mizzi," he called, and then : f_o But what are you doing f__   the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had clearly not found the paper they were looking for, and had then tried to shut everything up again in the cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- abundance of papers had not succeeded. Would not be pat off and asked again : " What, you don't know the Count " " Why should I " replied the teacher in a low tone, and added aloud in French : " Please remember that there are innocent children present." K. " But,' Frieda went   on, f_o even if everything were disproved, what would be gained by that, what would it matter to me What happens in that house is purely their business and his business, no tmine. Too was very tired, perhaps it was from fatigue that he had not stood up to Jeremiah as he should have. A school janitor was an important person to the rest of the stafff_" and should have been especially so to such an assistant as Schwarzer f_" a person not to be lightly despised, who should at lea^ be suitably f_>conciliated if professional considerations were not enough to prevent one from despising him. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. F_oI should step in his way and compel him to hear me.f__ f_oCompel him to hear you the landlady said. 

Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. But before I go into that I beg you, donf_Tt let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds domineering,  am no more domineering than I am inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way I should like to be treated myself." " How like a stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were much nearer to us before, were you not Your reserva- tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted )'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard to me either.f__ " If I speak diflerently from before," K. Yet the question of the erection of a waiting-room outside seemed to be nearing a favourable solution ; but it was really a sharp blow for the landlady f_" people laughed a little over it f_" that this matter of a waiting-room should itself make innumerable interviews necessary, so that the lobbies of the house were hardly ever empty. He asked why this was so and got the answer that they should be only too thankful to Erlanger. Without knowing anything of the circumstances under' which K.*s appointment had come about, of the difficulties that it encountered in the community and at the Castle, of the complications that had already occurred during K.*s sojourn here or had been foreshadowed, without knowing anything of all this, indeed without even showing, what should have been expected of a secretary as a matter of course, that he had at least itn inkling of it all, he offered to settle the whole affair up there in no time at all with the aid of his little note-pad. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. Why should I have come asked K. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. For whom should they smarten themselves Nobody saw them, at best the staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough was welcome to smarten herself. 

Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. With us here things are quite certainlj not in such a way that an expert employee should be lefi unused. Without knowing anything of the circumstances under' which K.*s appointment had come about, of the difficulties that it encountered in the community and at the Castle, of the complications that had already occurred during K.*s sojourn here or had been foreshadowed, without knowing anything of all this, indeed without even showing, what should have been expected of a secretary as a matter of course, that he had at least itn inkling of it all, he offered to settle the whole affair up there in no time at all with the aid of his little note-pad. 

The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. For my own part I don't know why he should fear that f_" my own opinion is that you should just be allowed to do what you like. For my own part I don't know why he should fear that f_" my own opinion is that you should just be allowed to do what you like. And he certainly never gave me this post so that I and my dependents should freeze here, but f_" as you told me yourself f_" to keep me from doing anything thoughtless or desperate. Does she queen it over you on account of her beauty, which you've mentioned more than once Well, you're all three very like each other, but Amalia's distinguishing mark is hardly a recommendation, and repelled me the first time I saw it, I mean her cold hard eye. 
Had he then not noticed under what difficulties fhc distribution of files had proceeded, some- thing in itself incomprehensible, since after all each of the gentlemen served only the cause, never thinking of his personal advantage and hence being obliged to exert all his powers to seeing that the distribution of the files, this important, fundamental, preliminary work, should proceed quickly and easily and without any mistakes And had K. The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. If we had suddenly put in an appear- ance with the news that everything was settled, that it had only been a misunderstanding, say, which was now quite cleared up, or that there had been actually some cause for offence which had now been made good, or else f_" and even this would have satisfied people f_" that through our influence in the Castle the affair had been dropped, we should certainly have been received again with open arms, there would have been kissings and congratulations, I have seen that kind of thing happen to others once or twice already. We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. Is there any reason why it should be different in the Castle Somebody pointed out that particular official to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually a resemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. 
But the Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this post would keep you out of difficulties, and that conse- quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ; he suggested further, that along with you we would obtain the services of your wife and your assistants, so that the school should be kept in first-rate order, and not only it, but the school-garden as well. 
All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. Are we to   suppose that Klamm has to squeeze his way among other officials in a common room with a pencil behind his ear? Of course it would be still fimore reasonable of Barnabas when he's up there to ask a few people about the truth of things, for judging from his account there are plenty of men standing round. They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedly assured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor and to take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit of this intention, although with a good deal of whispering and giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselves into a smaller compass, crouching together in the corner so that in the dim light they looked like one large bundle. " I don't know," said K., " why I should let myself be examined, why I should give in to a joke or an official whim. Do you really think, Frieda, I should have opened the door for you, making the way free for you " P. But I have heard grave complaints about you, on account of your behaviour this morning.f__ f__ Hef_Ts improving,f__ Gisa said, without i^lancing at K. Do you think itf_Ts you I'm anxious about Did I bother about you in the least so long as you were by yourself Even though it would jiave been a good thing and saved a lot of trouble The only thing I ever said to my husband about you was : ' Keep your distance where he's concerned.' And I should have done that myself to this very day if Frieda hadn't got mixed up with, your affairs. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. Perhaps, my dear Land   Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he should have been moved at least to make enquiries the other departments about the affair. The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. 
Such negotiations lasted a very long time, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentleman would perhaps hand over part of the files or get other files as compensation, since all that had happened was that a mistake had been made ; but it also happened sometimes that someone simply had to abandon all the files demanded, either because he had been driven into a corner by the servant's evidence or because he was tired of the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not give rlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flung them out into the passage, so that the strings came undone and the papers flew about and the servants had a great deal of trouble getting everything straight again. Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. At last the Superintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu- ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said that you were a Land Surveyor after all and so should be able to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. On Frieda's account K. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. 
But the Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this post would keep you out of difficulties, and that conse- quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ; he suggested further, that along with you we would obtain the services of your wife and your assistants, so that the school should be kept in first-rate order, and not only it, but the school-garden as well. At last the Superintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu- ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said that you were a Land Surveyor after all and so should be able to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. 
I should take Frieda's own word for this, even if I had not infallible evidence for it. You can see Frieda's merits very well for yourself, you notice her power of observation, her resolution, her influence on people, only you do, of course, interpret it all wrongly, believing she turns everything self-seekingly to account only for her own benefit and for evil purposes, or even as a weapon against you. 

You have no tender- ness to spare for me, you have hardly even time for me, you leave me to the assistants, the idea of being jealous never comes into your mind, my only value for you is tliat I was once Klammf_Ts sweetheart, in your ignorance you exert yourself to keep me from forgetting Klamm, so that when the decisive moment comes I should not make any resistance ; yet at the same time you carry on a feud with the landlady, the only one you think capable of separating me from you, and thatf_Ts why you brought your quarrel with her to a crisis, so as to have to leave the Bridge Inn with me ; but that, so far as Tm concerned, I belong to you whatever happens, you liavenf_Tt the slightest doubt. 
And speaking confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything in common with the village, even although his dark clothes looked like a peasant's finery. I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. " But,' Frieda went   on, f_o even if everything were disproved, what would be gained by that, what would it matter to me What happens in that house is purely their business and his business, no tmine. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. This was unpleasant, for on account of the intense heat, which now towards morning had given way, however, to a coldness \^hich could be felt, they had all taken off everything but their shirts, and just as they were beginning to put on their clothes, Gisa, the lady teacher, appeared at the door, a fair, tall, beautiful, but somewhat stiff young woman. Even now the landlord of the Herrenhof himself came hastening along from far off, dressed in black and buttoned up as always ;   but it was as though he were forgetful of his dignity, he was in such a hurry ; his arms were half outspread, just as if he liad been called on account of some great disaster and were coming in order to take hold of it and instantly smother it against his chest, and at every little irregularity in the ringing he seemed briefly to leap into the air and hurry on faster still. But there would have been   a big difference between having the Central Bureau, or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on his account in the middle of the night by an insistent although ostensibly humble request for an immediate decision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probably not in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. 
My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. You're certainly making it much worse than it is with such womanish fussing." Amalia's Secret " Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why it should be of any importance. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. If she had suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy with Amalia. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. 
The bunk downstairs in the maidsf_T room is waiting for her, she will come m, welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly hidden and wonf_Tt be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times better forgotten. 
He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. 

Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. Her favourite seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, well, there she sat and f_" we couldn't tell exactly what was wrong f_" used to doze or carry on long conversa- tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her lips. Where should it hang if not over the table and yet they found it insupportable. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. Would have had the satisfaction of having organised everything properly to the best of his knowledge, whereas to-day he should have been on his guard against the landlady's interference and yet had done nothing to protect himself from it. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. 
But then, I thought again that it was impossible that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, than in other words all that I did should be turned down in advance without further examination. The room is unfortunately, as I only now see, not so carefully prepared as I should have wished. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. " He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. 
" He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. Before we could dare to reproach her we should first of all have to have an inkling of how she suflers. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. This must not be allowed to happen, even if the landlord and the landlady should unite against him. Yet the question of the erection of a waiting-room outside seemed to be nearing a favourable solution ; but it was really a sharp blow for the landlady f_" people laughed a little over it f_" that this matter of a waiting-room should itself make innumerable interviews necessary, so that the lobbies of the house were hardly ever empty. He asked why this was so and got the answer that they should be only too thankful to Erlanger. Secretary, decide this question, whether what I may say here can get as far as Klamm or not." " Of course it can," said Momus, lowering his eyes proudly and gazing at nothing, " otherwise why should I be secretary here " "Now you see, madam," said K., " I don't need a road to Klamm, but only to Mr. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Before we could dare to reproach her we should first of all have to have an inkling of how she suflers. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. Why should I have come asked K. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. Before we could dare to reproach her we should first of all have to have an inkling of how she suflers. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. I should not collapse under that burden, however great it might be.' But he did not come. Left entirely to hen She sent them to her old friends, reminded people of her existence, complained that she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incited people against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival, begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing to Klamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to be spared and as if for this reason he must on no account be allowed to come down into tap-room. 
Such negotiations lasted a very long time, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentleman would perhaps hand over part of the files or get other files as compensation, since all that had happened was that a mistake had been made ; but it also happened sometimes that someone simply had to abandon all the files demanded, either because he had been driven into a corner by the servant's evidence or because he was tired of the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not give rlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flung them out into the passage, so that the strings came undone and the papers flew about and the servants had a great deal of trouble getting everything straight again. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. 
With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. And speaking confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything in common with the village, even although his dark clothes looked like a peasant's finery. Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed on account of the allair wurli the letter?f__ K. But it's next thing to madness to imagine that Klamm could have given me Hans as a husband simply that I might have no great difficulty in going to him if he should summon me sometime again. Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. Our mother was the feeblest of us dl, probably because she had not only endured our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. 
And even if this perfect improbability should suddenly have taken on shape, is then everything lost On the contrary. Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedly assured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor and to take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit of this intention, although with a good deal of whispering and giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselves into a smaller compass, crouching together in the corner so that in the dim light they looked like one large bundle. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. Although I donf_Tt belong to the Castle, and am only a woman, only a landlady here in an inn of the lowest kind f_" itf_Ts not of the very lowest but not far from it f_" and on that account you may not perhaps set much store by my explanation, still If_Tve kept my eyes open all my life and met many kinds of people and taken the whole burden of the inn on my own shoulders, for Martin is no landlord although hef_Ts a good man, and responsi- bility is a tiling hef_Tll never understand. And theref_Ts just one thing, one thing my poor head canf_Tt understand, that a girl who had the honour of being known as Klammf_Ts mistress f_" a wild exaggeration in my opinion f_" should have allowed you even to lay a finger on her.f__ f__ Most certainly, thatf_Ts remarkable,f__ said K., drawing Frieda to his bosom f_" she submitted at once although with bent head f_" f__ but in my opinion that only proves the possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. 
The bunk downstairs in the maidsf_T room is waiting for her, she will come m, welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly hidden and wonf_Tt be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times better forgotten. So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. If she had suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy with Amalia. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. But Olga's invitation to spend the night there and wait for Barnabas he declined, for himself he might perhaps have accepted fof it was already late in the night and it seemed to him that now, whether he wanted it or not, he was bound to this family in such a way that a bed for the night here, though for many reasons painful, nevertheless, when one considered this common bond, was the most suitable for him in the village ; all the same he declined it, the assistant's visit had alarmed him, it was incomprehensible to him how Frieda, who knew his wishes quite well, and the assist- ants, who had learned to fear him, had come together again like this, so that Frieda didn't scruple to send an assistant for him, only one of them, too, while the other had probably remained to keep her company. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. The bunk downstairs in the maidsf_T room is waiting for her, she will come m, welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly hidden and wonf_Tt be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times better forgotten. The worst thing about the story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easily have been made good, I don't know why you lay such exaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letter from Sortini shame Amalia for ever f_" which is what one would gather from your story, but that's a sheer impossibility, it would have been easy to make up for it to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing might have blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed, and not Amalia. At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. Wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm f__ Olga laughed out loud. I am not going to say that the job is too grand for you ; It is, after all, not a very splendid job, perhaps, if one regards it closely, it is somewhat more honourable than your previous job, on the whole, however, the difference   is not great, both arc indeed so similar one can hardly distinguish between them; indeed, one might almost assert that being a chamber-maid is preferable to the tap- room, for there one is always among secretaries, here, on the other hand, even though one is allowed to serve the secretaries' chiefs in the private rooms, still, one also has to have a lot to do with quite common people, for instance with me ; actually I am not really supposed to sit about anywhere but right here in the tap-room f_" ^and is it such a great and glorious honour to assbeiate with me Well, it seems so to you, and perhaps you have your reasons for thinking so. Are we to   suppose that Klamm has to squeeze his way among other officials in a common room with a pencil behind his ear? The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. 

" He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. 
Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. He looked at the clock, and said : f_T My assistants should be arriving soon. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. Wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm f__ Olga laughed out loud. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. Secretary, decide this question, whether what I may say here can get as far as Klamm or not." " Of course it can," said Momus, lowering his eyes proudly and gazing at nothing, " otherwise why should I be secretary here " "Now you see, madam," said K., " I don't need a road to Klamm, but only to Mr. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Must not wait near the house f_" again it was sensitiveness on his mother's account that dictated his reaction f_" K. 
You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. But here f_" look, there are the assistants It's not you they think of when they clasp their hands, but me." " And it's not I who am looking at them," said K., " but you." " Certainly, me," said Frieda almost angrily, " that's what I've been saying all the time ; why else should they be always at my heels, even if they are messengers of Klamm's '   f_o Messengers of Klamm's " repeated K. In general the letter means nothing more than that Klamm intends to take a personal interest in you if you should be taken into the state service." " Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letter so well that nothing remains of it but a signature on a blank sheet of paper. 

Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedly assured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor and to take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit of this intention, although with a good deal of whispering and giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselves into a smaller compass, crouching together in the corner so that in the dim light they looked like one large bundle. No one should deprive him of that now. And so that all should know what it was all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the outcome was certain. Secretary," asked K., " read the protocol " "No," replied Momus, " why should he Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. 
Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. 
And even if their information were no more reliable than that of the man who pointed out Klamm of his own accord, there would be surely some common ground, some ground for comparison, in the various things they said. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. But there would have been   a big difference between having the Central Bureau, or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on his account in the middle of the night by an insistent although ostensibly humble request for an immediate decision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probably not in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. If the gentleman concerned at all deigned to   enter into negotiations, there were matter-of-fact dis- cussions during which the servant referred to his catalogue, the gentleman to his notes and to precisely those files that he was supposed to return, which for the time being, however, he clutched tightly in his hand, so that scarcely a corner of them remained visible to the servant s longing eyes. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. At any rate, all that should make Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you, and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they're comparatively reasonable, and even for those intimately affected by them much more endurable. C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. " I should like to have a bit of a look at it," K. 
Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. At last the Superintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu- ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said that you were a Land Surveyor after all and so should be able to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. How should files come to be there What did the maids care about files But the outcome was always the same^ abuse and threats uttered by the disappointed commission and passed on by the landlord. 
To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. 
" Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. K., startled out of his weariness by the new surroundings and Erlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtle dillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the f_~   schoolmasterf_" outwardly, too, there were litric points of resemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair ,ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and to left were absent that day f_" ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' as possible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcr had been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturb him he had gone away, then, of course, passed over in silence what he had been doing in the meantime, resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihs confusing the doors, and concluded by referring to his extraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be taken into consideration. It seems so to uc^ that does not mean fie is uneasyf_" how should uneasiness touch him? 

C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. You have no tender- ness to spare for me, you have hardly even time for me, you leave me to the assistants, the idea of being jealous never comes into your mind, my only value for you is tliat I was once Klammf_Ts sweetheart, in your ignorance you exert yourself to keep me from forgetting Klamm, so that when the decisive moment comes I should not make any resistance ; yet at the same time you carry on a feud with the landlady, the only one you think capable of separating me from you, and thatf_Ts why you brought your quarrel with her to a crisis, so as to have to leave the Bridge Inn with me ; but that, so far as Tm concerned, I belong to you whatever happens, you liavenf_Tt the slightest doubt. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. 

That is unfortunately true, I did neglect her, but there were special reascttis for that, which have nothing to do with this discussion ; I should be happy if she were to come back to me, but I should at once begin to neglect her all over again. 

Her favourite seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, well, there she sat and f_" we couldn't tell exactly what was wrong f_" used to doze or carry on long conversa- tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her lips. The bunk downstairs in the maidsf_T room is waiting for her, she will come m, welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly hidden and wonf_Tt be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times better forgotten. That is unfortunately true, I did neglect her, but there were special reascttis for that, which have nothing to do with this discussion ; I should be happy if she were to come back to me, but I should at once begin to neglect her all over again. Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. If we had suddenly put in an appear- ance with the news that everything was settled, that it had only been a misunderstanding, say, which was now quite cleared up, or that there had been actually some cause for offence which had now been made good, or else f_" and even this would have satisfied people f_" that through our influence in the Castle the affair had been dropped, we should certainly have been received again with open arms, there would have been kissings and congratulations, I have seen that kind of thing happen to others once or twice already. When Frieda gave it away it wasnf_Tt out of mischief but as a warning, to let the parish know that something had happened which everybody should be careful to keep clear of. Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. Then he sat down in a corner and  Z neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had to attend to the last people there by ourselves as well as we could/* And where do you see in all this the influence of the Castle asked K. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. At last the Superintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu- ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said that you were a Land Surveyor after all and so should be able to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. No longer in her house ; if he had connections with the Castle, then he should take advantage of them at once, for he must leave the house that very day, that very minute, and she would only take him back again at the express order and command of the authorities ; but she hoped it would not come to that, for she too had connections with the Castle and f_>would know how to make use of them. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. 
Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. He asked why this was so and got the answer that they should be only too thankful to Erlanger. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. A school janitor was an important person to the rest of the stafff_" and should have been especially so to such an assistant as Schwarzer f_" a person not to be lightly despised, who should at lea^ be suitably f_>conciliated if professional considerations were not enough to prevent one from despising him. With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. 

You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. Her favourite seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, well, there she sat and f_" we couldn't tell exactly what was wrong f_" used to doze or carry on long conversa- tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her lips. 

Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. 

At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. Mizzi," he called, and then : f_o But what are you doing f__   the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had clearly not found the paper they were looking for, and had then tried to shut everything up again in the cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- abundance of papers had not succeeded. In general the letter means nothing more than that Klamm intends to take a personal interest in you if you should be taken into the state service." " Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letter so well that nothing remains of it but a signature on a blank sheet of paper. I am not going to say that the job is too grand for you ; It is, after all, not a very splendid job, perhaps, if one regards it closely, it is somewhat more honourable than your previous job, on the whole, however, the difference   is not great, both arc indeed so similar one can hardly distinguish between them; indeed, one might almost assert that being a chamber-maid is preferable to the tap- room, for there one is always among secretaries, here, on the other hand, even though one is allowed to serve the secretaries' chiefs in the private rooms, still, one also has to have a lot to do with quite common people, for instance with me ; actually I am not really supposed to sit about anywhere but right here in the tap-room f_" ^and is it such a great and glorious honour to assbeiate with me Well, it seems so to you, and perhaps you have your reasons for thinking so. Left entirely to hen She sent them to her old friends, reminded people of her existence, complained that she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incited people against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival, begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing to Klamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to be spared and as if for this reason he must on no account be allowed to come down into tap-room. What she represented to one as a way of sparing Klammf_Ts feelings she succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlord was concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klamm did not come any more. But I have heard grave complaints about you, on account of your behaviour this morning.f__ f__ Hef_Ts improving,f__ Gisa said, without i^lancing at K. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. But there would have been   a big difference between having the Central Bureau, or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on his account in the middle of the night by an insistent although ostensibly humble request for an immediate decision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probably not in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. 
Wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm f__ Olga laughed out loud. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. 
He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. " On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre- taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguard themselves, within the terms of the regulations, against the night interrogations and their perhaps only apparent disadvantages. 
With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. 
Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. Must not wait near the house f_" again it was sensitiveness on his mother's account that dictated his reaction f_" K. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. 
Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. " Alas," the girl said and smiled f_" she looked both confiding and aloof f_" " nobody comes, it is as though the world had forgotten us." " Why should anyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, is there anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowly witjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. How should files come to be there What did the maids care about files But the outcome was always the same^ abuse and threats uttered by the disappointed commission and passed on by the landlord. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. And it was with an almost troubled seriousness that, driven into a corner by Frieda's questions, he at last confessed those things. But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. 
Had no prcjper appreciation of it ; he, who with all his powers strove to get a glimpse of Klamm, valued very little, for example, the post of a Momus who was permitted to live in Klamm 's eye ; for it was not Klamm's environ- ment in itself that seemed to him worth striving for, but rather that he, K., he only and no one else, should attain to Klamm, and should attain to him not, to rest with him, but to go on beyond him, f_~farther yet, into the Castle. Secretary, decide this question, whether what I may say here can get as far as Klamm or not." " Of course it can," said Momus, lowering his eyes proudly and gazing at nothing, " otherwise why should I be secretary here " "Now you see, madam," said K., " I don't need a road to Klamm, but only to Mr. And in comparison with that is it so monstrous that Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations with women are at least unknown, should condescend for once to write in his beautiful official hand a letter, however abominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here in Klamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's love for him establish one The relation existing between the women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult, or rather very easy to determine. Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. The fi;;st possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as agreement.f__ f__ There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more   plausible ones,f__ the landlady said, f__ if I do enter into your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing there.f__ f_oThat would change nothing,f__ K. And even if their information were no more reliable than that of the man who pointed out Klamm of his own accord, there would be surely some common ground, some ground for comparison, in the various things they said. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. 
But now the servant was no longer paying any further attention to the matter^ he had finished his job, he pointed to the handle of the little barrow, indicating that the otRer servant should take hold of it, and so they went away again as they had come, only more contentedly and so quickly that the little barrow bounced along ahead of them. Even now the landlord of the Herrenhof himself came hastening along from far off, dressed in black and buttoned up as always ;   but it was as though he were forgetful of his dignity, he was in such a hurry ; his arms were half outspread, just as if he liad been called on account of some great disaster and were coming in order to take hold of it and instantly smother it against his chest, and at every little irregularity in the ringing he seemed briefly to leap into the air and hurry on faster still. I should take Frieda's own word for this, even if I had not infallible evidence for it. Our mother was the feeblest of us dl, probably because she had not only endured our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. Had never yet heard, of his downward-pressing gaze, which could never be proved or disproved, of liis wheelings   which could never be disturbed by anything that K. " I don't know," said K., " why I should let myself be examined, why I should give in to a joke or an official whim. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. And when now, after finishing his work in the shed, the coachman went across the courtyard in his slow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and then returned, all very slowly, while he literally looked at nothing but his own footprints in the snow f_" and finally shut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electric lights went out too f_" for whom should they remain on f_" and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery still remained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for a little, it seemed to K. Repeated, and the weariness he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had commanded  that they should stay with her He could quite well have found his own way home, and better done, in- deed, than in this company. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. 
Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. Then we should have lost you, and I confess that now you mean almost more to me than Barnabas's service in the Castle. But there would have been   a big difference between having the Central Bureau, or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on his account in the middle of the night by an insistent although ostensibly humble request for an immediate decision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probably not in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. On Frieda's account K. But I repeated everything to Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he still had no capacity whatever to distinguish between what was true and what was false, and on account of the TMfi CASTLfi ^} family position was almost famishing to hear all these things ; and he drank in everything and burned with eagerness for more. A school janitor was an important person to the rest of the stafff_" and should have been especially so to such an assistant as Schwarzer f_" a person not to be lightly despised, who should at lea^ be suitably f_>conciliated if professional considerations were not enough to prevent one from despising him. Decided to keep this fact in mind, also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened by the way in which events of succeeding days had seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. Are we to   suppose that Klamm has to squeeze his way among other officials in a common room with a pencil behind his ear? Of course it would be still fimore reasonable of Barnabas when he's up there to ask a few people about the truth of things, for judging from his account there are plenty of men standing round. That everything should be lost is yet more improbable than the most improbable thing itself. The applicant wrings from us in the night, as the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the \vL)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official   power f_" that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, wc are happy. 
Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. The fi;;st possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as agreement.f__ f__ There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more   plausible ones,f__ the landlady said, f__ if I do enter into your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing there.f__ f_oThat would change nothing,f__ K. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. 
F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. Does she queen it over you on account of her beauty, which you've mentioned more than once Well, you're all three very like each other, but Amalia's distinguishing mark is hardly a recommendation, and repelled me the first time I saw it, I mean her cold hard eye. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. Certainly, Klamm will never speak to anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter   how much trouble this anybody may take, and no matter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I that fact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, never allow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself : why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endure seeing this anybody At any rate, it can't be proved, seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle- man nodded eagerly. Had no prcjper appreciation of it ; he, who with all his powers strove to get a glimpse of Klamm, valued very little, for example, the post of a Momus who was permitted to live in Klamm 's eye ; for it was not Klamm's environ- ment in itself that seemed to him worth striving for, but rather that he, K., he only and no one else, should attain to Klamm, and should attain to him not, to rest with him, but to go on beyond him, f_~farther yet, into the Castle. 



F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. That's as it should be and dt's certainly Klamm's will. Certainly, Klamm will never speak to anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter   how much trouble this anybody may take, and no matter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I that fact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, never allow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself : why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endure seeing this anybody At any rate, it can't be proved, seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle- man nodded eagerly. Why should I get on better than they do For that was f_> just what held us together, the fact that the future was barred to all three of us in the same way, and now I have broken through after all and was separated from them. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. And speaking confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything in common with the village, even although his dark clothes looked like a peasant's finery. Repeated, and the weariness he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had commanded  that they should stay with her He could quite well have found his own way home, and better done, in- deed, than in this company. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. It was incompre- hensible to her why there should need to be clients waiting at all. 

Is there any reason why it should be different in the Castle Somebody pointed out that particular official to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually a resemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. Are we to   suppose that Klamm has to squeeze his way among other officials in a common room with a pencil behind his ear? But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. 
Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. Then we should have lost you, and I confess that now you mean almost more to me than Barnabas's service in the Castle. You have no tender- ness to spare for me, you have hardly even time for me, you leave me to the assistants, the idea of being jealous never comes into your mind, my only value for you is tliat I was once Klammf_Ts sweetheart, in your ignorance you exert yourself to keep me from forgetting Klamm, so that when the decisive moment comes I should not make any resistance ; yet at the same time you carry on a feud with the landlady, the only one you think capable of separating me from you, and thatf_Ts why you brought your quarrel with her to a crisis, so as to have to leave the Bridge Inn with me ; but that, so far as Tm concerned, I belong to you whatever happens, you liavenf_Tt the slightest doubt. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. I should like to see her again." To diminish the effect of what he said, K. And on the ground floor, but in the corner where the opposite wing of the house joined the main building, there was an entrance to the house, open, and without a door. But although she doesn't bother about us we're as dependent on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise   us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice, only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. At the same time- and this makes it even more difficult for me to undcr- st;|nd you f_" you seem to be the one who spurs Barnabas on in all his endeavours, something, by the way, that I should never even have dreamt of supposing after that first evening when we met.f__ You misjudge me, O ga   said, *' I don^t do any spurring, oh no ; if what Barnabas docs were not necessary I should be the first who would try to hold him back and keep him here always. 
If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. You're certainly making it much worse than it is with such womanish fussing." Amalia's Secret " Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why it should be of any importance. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. And he certainly never gave me this post so that I and my dependents should freeze here, but f_" as you told me yourself f_" to keep me from doing anything thoughtless or desperate. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. At any rate, all that should make Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you, and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they're comparatively reasonable, and even for those intimately affected by them much more endurable. And in comparison with that is it so monstrous that Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations with women are at least unknown, should condescend for once to write in his beautiful official hand a letter, however abominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here in Klamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's love for him establish one The relation existing between the women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult, or rather very easy to determine. But she's very bothered and unhappy on your account, can't work, lies in bed and sighs and complains all the time." ** Shall I go and see her " asked K. Why should I have come asked K. 

My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. 
Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. Later on we pieced it all together for our- selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straight tO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account had stayed in the village instead, and in the morning, being very angry because even overnight he hadn't succeeded in forgetting her, had written the letter. Sordini countered : ' Why had I only mentioned this official order now ' I replied : f_~ Because I had just remembered it.' Sordini : f_~ That was very extra- ordinary.' Myself : f_~ It was not in the least extra- ordinary in such a long-drawn-out business.' Sordini ; f_~ Yes, it was extraordinary, for the order that I remem- bered didn't exist.' Myself : ' Of course it didn't exist, for the whole document had gone a-missing.' Sordini : f_~ But there must be a memorandum extant relating to this first communication, and there wasn't one extant.' That drew me up, for that an error should happen in Sordini's department I neither dared to maintain nor to believe. I'm telling you this Wy on father's account ; not much more than three years have passed since then, and look at him now." Only then did K. 
Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. But before I go into that I beg you, donf_Tt let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds domineering,  am no more domineering than I am inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way I should like to be treated myself." " How like a stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were much nearer to us before, were you not Your reserva- tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted )'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard to me either.f__ " If I speak diflerently from before," K. And in comparison with that is it so monstrous that Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations with women are at least unknown, should condescend for once to write in his beautiful official hand a letter, however abominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here in Klamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's love for him establish one The relation existing between the women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult, or rather very easy to determine. If she had suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy with Amalia. 

Before we could dare to reproach her we should first of all have to have an inkling of how she suflers. " I should like to have a bit of a look at it," K. All that still sti;ikes me as queer is the fact that such things should ever have been meant to be made the basis of an interrogation and that even Klamm's name should have been misused for that purpose." " If I were your enemy," the Itfhd- lady said, " I could not have wished for anything better   than that you should take such a view of this f_o Ah yes,f_T' K. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. No longer in her house ; if he had connections with the Castle, then he should take advantage of them at once, for he must leave the house that very day, that very minute, and she would only take him back again at the express order and command of the authorities ; but she hoped it would not come to that, for she too had connections with the Castle and f_>would know how to make use of them. Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. 

This must not be allowed to happen, even if the landlord and the landlady should unite against him. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. 
The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. Now, you should have seen Amalia at that time. The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. 
Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedly assured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor and to take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit of this intention, although with a good deal of whispering and giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselves into a smaller compass, crouching together in the corner so that in the dim light they looked like one large bundle. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. 
I don't know why he should seem a passionate person in your eyes. I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. 
I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. 
And it was with an almost troubled seriousness that, driven into a corner by Frieda's questions, he at last confessed those things. 

Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. Not in ever thing, I won't say that you justify her in everythir for was it not on my account alone that you sent t assistants packing Oh, if you but knew with wl passion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself in that you do and say, even when it gives me pair " Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal  the slightest thing from you. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. And he certainly never gave me this post so that I and my dependents should freeze here, but f_" as you told me yourself f_" to keep me from doing anything thoughtless or desperate. At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of course have upheld her just the same ; but her not going was heroic. 
"You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. I know a great many of the servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's servants who have come to the village during the last two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't be a stranger there. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. 

For whom should they smarten themselves Nobody saw them, at best the staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough was welcome to smarten herself. Mizzi," he called, and then : f_o But what are you doing f__   the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had clearly not found the paper they were looking for, and had then tried to shut everything up again in the cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- abundance of papers had not succeeded. But then, I thought again that it was impossible that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, than in other words all that I did should be turned down in advance without further examination. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. 
At any rate, all that should make Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you, and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they're comparatively reasonable, and even for those intimately affected by them much more endurable. But although she doesn't bother about us we're as dependent on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise   us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice, only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. " Do you think he does it for the money " " Maybe he does," said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented " " He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga, " but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service, at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K., " do you even doubt that " "Well," said Olga, " not really, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is accepted by the attendants as one of themselves, he sees various olficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela- tively important letters, even with verbally delivered messages, that's a good deal, after all, and we should be proud of what he has achieved for a young man of his years." K. 
A school janitor was an important person to the rest of the stafff_" and should have been especially so to such an assistant as Schwarzer f_" a person not to be lightly despised, who should at lea^ be suitably f_>conciliated if professional considerations were not enough to prevent one from despising him. As for me, I confess it frankly, had h received a letter like that I should have gone. At any rate, all that should make Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you, and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they're comparatively reasonable, and even for those intimately affected by them much more endurable. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. " I don't know," said K., " why I should let myself be examined, why I should give in to a joke or an official whim. Repeated, and the weariness he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had commanded  that they should stay with her He could quite well have found his own way home, and better done, in- deed, than in this company. And theref_Ts just one thing, one thing my poor head canf_Tt understand, that a girl who had the honour of being known as Klammf_Ts mistress f_" a wild exaggeration in my opinion f_" should have allowed you even to lay a finger on her.f__ f__ Most certainly, thatf_Ts remarkable,f__ said K., drawing Frieda to his bosom f_" she submitted at once although with bent head f_" f__ but in my opinion that only proves the possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. 
Our mother was the feeblest of us dl, probably because she had not only endured our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. The fi;;st possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as agreement.f__ f__ There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more   plausible ones,f__ the landlady said, f__ if I do enter into your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing there.f__ f_oThat would change nothing,f__ K. You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. Itf_Ts completely out of the question of course that I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterly improbable thing should happen after all and I should go to sleep while you are still here, then please stay quiet and don't open the door, either. Why should I have come asked K. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. 
I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. " But,' Frieda went   on, f_o even if everything were disproved, what would be gained by that, what would it matter to me What happens in that house is purely their business and his business, no tmine. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. But she's very bothered and unhappy on your account, can't work, lies in bed and sighs and complains all the time." ** Shall I go and see her " asked K. Sordini countered : ' Why had I only mentioned this official order now ' I replied : f_~ Because I had just remembered it.' Sordini : f_~ That was very extra- ordinary.' Myself : f_~ It was not in the least extra- ordinary in such a long-drawn-out business.' Sordini ; f_~ Yes, it was extraordinary, for the order that I remem- bered didn't exist.' Myself : ' Of course it didn't exist, for the whole document had gone a-missing.' Sordini : f_~ But there must be a memorandum extant relating to this first communication, and there wasn't one extant.' That drew me up, for that an error should happen in Sordini's department I neither dared to maintain nor to believe. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm f__ Olga laughed out loud. 
After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. " Do you think he does it for the money " " Maybe he does," said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented " " He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga, " but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service, at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K., " do you even doubt that " "Well," said Olga, " not really, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is accepted by the attendants as one of themselves, he sees various olficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela- tively important letters, even with verbally delivered messages, that's a good deal, after all, and we should be proud of what he has achieved for a young man of his years." K. 
Then we should have lost you, and I confess that now you mean almost more to me than Barnabas's service in the Castle. You're certainly making it much worse than it is with such womanish fussing." Amalia's Secret " Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why it should be of any importance. Where should it hang if not over the table and yet they found it insupportable. It concerned itself about the common welfare, of course, but it couldn't simply interfere with the natural course of events for the sole purpose of serving the interest of one man. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. I should like to see her again." To diminish the effect of what he said, K. As for me, I confess it frankly, had h received a letter like that I should have gone. 
F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. 
And even if their information were no more reliable than that of the man who pointed out Klamm of his own accord, there would be surely some common ground, some ground for comparison, in the various things they said. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. Later on we pieced it all together for our- selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straight tO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account had stayed in the village instead, and in the morning, being very angry because even overnight he hadn't succeeded in forgetting her, had written the letter. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. Too was very tired, perhaps it was from fatigue that he had not stood up to Jeremiah as he should have. 


Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. For whom should they smarten themselves Nobody saw them, at best the staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough was welcome to smarten herself. 
I would never and will 'never answer merely because of someone's office, neither then nor now/' Momus replied : 'f_~Of whom, th^, should we think Who else is there here  Look for yourself " In the hall they were met by an attendant who led them the old way, already known to K., across the court- yard, then into ihe entry and through the low, somewhat downward sloping passage. 
If the gentleman concerned at all deigned to   enter into negotiations, there were matter-of-fact dis- cussions during which the servant referred to his catalogue, the gentleman to his notes and to precisely those files that he was supposed to return, which for the time being, however, he clutched tightly in his hand, so that scarcely a corner of them remained visible to the servant s longing eyes. And when now, after finishing his work in the shed, the coachman went across the courtyard in his slow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and then returned, all very slowly, while he literally looked at nothing but his own footprints in the snow f_" and finally shut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electric lights went out too f_" for whom should they remain on f_" and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery still remained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for a little, it seemed to K. That's as it should be and dt's certainly Klamm's will. Was stamping through the snow outside f_" the path should have been shovelled free long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- ward f_" he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, still holding to the railings. 
To comfort her assured her that he would go immediately to the village Super- intendent and demand that it should be replaced, and see that this was done, was she able to gather herself together sufficiently to run out of their stockade in her chemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at least from being stained any more. 

To kce}> a watch over all this should really be the servantsf_T ]oh, but unfortunately they are so little to be depcnvled on that a large part of this work has to be done by us, not least by me, who am reputed to have a particularly shaip eye for these things. Even now the landlord of the Herrenhof himself came hastening along from far off, dressed in black and buttoned up as always ;   but it was as though he were forgetful of his dignity, he was in such a hurry ; his arms were half outspread, just as if he liad been called on account of some great disaster and were coming in order to take hold of it and instantly smother it against his chest, and at every little irregularity in the ringing he seemed briefly to leap into the air and hurry on faster still. Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in that case I should have left long ago. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. But then, I thought again that it was impossible that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, than in other words all that I did should be turned down in advance without further examination. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. But then, I thought again that it was impossible that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, than in other words all that I did should be turned down in advance without further examination. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. 

"He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. 
Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. 



F_~f_~ Of course," she replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other thoughts she added absently : f_~f_~ Why should you remain any more than the others " But when they had all retreated to the kitchen f_" even the assistants this time went at once, besides, a maid was behind them f_" Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the kitchen as well. " He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. Would not be pat off and asked again : " What, you don't know the Count " " Why should I " replied the teacher in a low tone, and added aloud in French : " Please remember that there are innocent children present." K. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. She didn't need any money in her job, she managed by means of lying and trickery, this was^an example Pepi did not want to and could not imitate, and that was why it was justifiable that she should smarten herself up like this in order to get herself thoroughly noticed right at the beginning. I should not collapse under that burden, however great it might be.' But he did not come. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. 

And Frieda, and when he was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively and confidential and began to question them eagerly and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to an independent decision about what they should do. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. But if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an unimportant letter, why should our actions and our words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc   in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee by our e^lanations And to hold the mean, without exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they give rise to are endless, and chance determines where one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them is a matter of chance. Took down a picture from the wall and stuck the letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in and the letter should hang there. With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. If she had suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy with Amalia. So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. Father didn't give in, he was still very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it wonf_Tt take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her benefit, for in reality he wasnf_Tt hoping for the restora- tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. Does she queen it over you on account of her beauty, which you've mentioned more than once Well, you're all three very like each other, but Amalia's distinguishing mark is hardly a recommendation, and repelled me the first time I saw it, I mean her cold hard eye. Now, you should have seen Amalia at that time. 
Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. 

Perhaps, my dear Land   Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he should have been moved at least to make enquiries the other departments about the affair. The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of my power, which isnf_Tt great.** ** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that  shanf_Tt be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land Surveyor already, here is Klammf_Ts letter.** Klammf_Ts letter,** said the Superintendent. 

You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. I know a great many of the servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's servants who have come to the village during the last two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't be a stranger there. If he should see it like that, perhaps he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- vants and using it for our family. 

F_~f_~ You should have come long ago," Erlanger said. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. And in comparison with that is it so monstrous that Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations with women are at least unknown, should condescend for once to write in his beautiful official hand a letter, however abominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here in Klamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's love for him establish one The relation existing between the women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult, or rather very easy to determine. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should have let me stay there. You're certainly making it much worse than it is with such womanish fussing." Amalia's Secret " Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why it should be of any importance. F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed on account of the allair wurli the letter?f__ K. 
Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. The applicant wrings from us in the night, as the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the \vL)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official   power f_" that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, wc are happy. Go along, what are you still doing here  No, you don't need to apologise for being sleepy, why should you  One's physical energies last only to a certain limit. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. 
And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. We have a saying here, perhaps youf_Tve heard it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts a good observation,f__ said K., he took it still more seri- ously than Olga, f__ a good observation, and the decisions may have other characteristics in common with young girls.f__ f__ Perhaps,f__ said Olga. Is there any reason why it should be different in the Castle Somebody pointed out that particular official to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually a resemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. 
Although I donf_Tt belong to the Castle, and am only a woman, only a landlady here in an inn of the lowest kind f_" itf_Ts not of the very lowest but not far from it f_" and on that account you may not perhaps set much store by my explanation, still If_Tve kept my eyes open all my life and met many kinds of people and taken the whole burden of the inn on my own shoulders, for Martin is no landlord although hef_Ts a good man, and responsi- bility is a tiling hef_Tll never understand. And theref_Ts just one thing, one thing my poor head canf_Tt understand, that a girl who had the honour of being known as Klammf_Ts mistress f_" a wild exaggeration in my opinion f_" should have allowed you even to lay a finger on her.f__ f__ Most certainly, thatf_Ts remarkable,f__ said K., drawing Frieda to his bosom f_" she submitted at once although with bent head f_" f__ but in my opinion that only proves the possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. What she represented to one as a way of sparing Klammf_Ts feelings she succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlord was concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klamm did not come any more. So she came back, the landlord, with a sidelong glance at Pepi, hesitated f_" should he sacrifice her, after she had proved her worth so well f_" but he was soon talked over, there was too much to be said for Frieda, and above all, of course, she would bring Klamm back to the saloon acjnin. The teacher swept aside his excuses, and said : f_oYou were dis- courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and experienced man who should be treated with respect.** f_o Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said K. " I can't believe that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you're right," said K., " but he's the only messenger that's sent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda, f_o all the more reason why you should beware of him." " Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that till now," said K. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Secretary," asked K., " read the protocol " "No," replied Momus, " why should he Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. 
With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. The fi;;st possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as agreement.f__ f__ There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more   plausible ones,f__ the landlady said, f__ if I do enter into your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing there.f__ f_oThat would change nothing,f__ K. F_oI should step in his way and compel him to hear me.f__ f_oCompel him to hear you the landlady said. " All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. But it's next thing to madness to imagine that Klamm could have given me Hans as a husband simply that I might have no great difficulty in going to him if he should summon me sometime again. Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. I'll admit f_" it's not so uncommon here f_" one of them was that he should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to   do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you by his evil languishing glances, anotherf_" here the land- lady supported himf_" was to invent fables about my unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow the further developments of the affair. Secretary," asked K., " read the protocol " "No," replied Momus, " why should he Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. 
To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. Had never yet heard, of his downward-pressing gaze, which could never be proved or disproved, of liis wheelings   which could never be disturbed by anything that K. 

For whom should they smarten themselves Nobody saw them, at best the staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough was welcome to smarten herself. So what should one smarten oneself up for Yes, one scarcely bothered to dress at all. Besides, in your condemna- tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any means amount to an actual antagonism between them, moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious   little man, and even if they should have been all lost o him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried with a sigh. Not in ever thing, I won't say that you justify her in everythir for was it not on my account alone that you sent t assistants packing Oh, if you but knew with wl passion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself in that you do and say, even when it gives me pair " Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal  the slightest thing from you. The fi;;st possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as agreement.f__ f__ There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more   plausible ones,f__ the landlady said, f__ if I do enter into your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing there.f__ f_oThat would change nothing,f__ K. But I repeated everything to Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he still had no capacity whatever to distinguish between what was true and what was false, and on account of the TMfi CASTLfi ^} family position was almost famishing to hear all these things ; and he drank in everything and burned with eagerness for more. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. Had he then not noticed under what difficulties fhc distribution of files had proceeded, some- thing in itself incomprehensible, since after all each of the gentlemen served only the cause, never thinking of his personal advantage and hence being obliged to exert all his powers to seeing that the distribution of the files, this important, fundamental, preliminary work, should proceed quickly and easily and without any mistakes And had K. He thanked them for having put an end to the distressing scene, if he should be taken to task about the matter it would be very welcome to him, for only in this way could he prevent a general mis- interpretation of his behaviour. He did not even have to ask that the room should be  l cleared, for all the men flocked out with averted faces lest he should recognise them again next day. He looked at the clock, and said : f_T My assistants should be arriving soon. You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. You can see Frieda's merits very well for yourself, you notice her power of observation, her resolution, her influence on people, only you do, of course, interpret it all wrongly, believing she turns everything self-seekingly to account only for her own benefit and for evil purposes, or even as a weapon against you. Yet the question of the erection of a waiting-room outside seemed to be nearing a favourable solution ; but it was really a sharp blow for the landlady f_" people laughed a little over it f_" that this matter of a waiting-room should itself make innumerable interviews necessary, so that the lobbies of the house were hardly ever empty. He asked why this was so and got the answer that they should be only too thankful to Erlanger. But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. But Olga's invitation to spend the night there and wait for Barnabas he declined, for himself he might perhaps have accepted fof it was already late in the night and it seemed to him that now, whether he wanted it or not, he was bound to this family in such a way that a bed for the night here, though for many reasons painful, nevertheless, when one considered this common bond, was the most suitable for him in the village ; all the same he declined it, the assistant's visit had alarmed him, it was incomprehensible to him how Frieda, who knew his wishes quite well, and the assist- ants, who had learned to fear him, had come together again like this, so that Frieda didn't scruple to send an assistant for him, only one of them, too, while the other had probably remained to keep her company. 

But only think, they don't want to go away, they know it's a miserable life they lead there, but they have resigned themselves to it, good souls, I think their tears as we said goodbye were mostly because they were sad about my having to leave our common room, going out into the cold f_" to us there everything seems cold that is outside the room f_" and having to make my way in the big strange rooms with big strange people, for no other purpose than to earn a living, which after all I had ^ managed to do up to now in the life we led together. So there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to nothing when one takes into account that the test for the official appointments is very stringent and that a member of any doubtful family is turned down in advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling for the result, from the very first day everybody asks him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping f_" how else cjjfuld he keep alive f_" then after years and years, perhaps as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, learns that everything is lost and that all his life has been in vain. But I repeated everything to Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he still had no capacity whatever to distinguish between what was true and what was false, and on account of the TMfi CASTLfi ^} family position was almost famishing to hear all these things ; and he drank in everything and burned with eagerness for more. But here f_" look, there are the assistants It's not you they think of when they clasp their hands, but me." " And it's not I who am looking at them," said K., " but you." " Certainly, me," said Frieda almost angrily, " that's what I've been saying all the time ; why else should they be always at my heels, even if they are messengers of Klamm's '   f_o Messengers of Klamm's " repeated K. And Frieda, and when he was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively and confidential and began to question them eagerly and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to an independent decision about what they should do. And even if their information were no more reliable than that of the man who pointed out Klamm of his own accord, there would be surely some common ground, some ground for comparison, in the various things they said. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. But then, I thought again that it was impossible that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, than in other words all that I did should be turned down in advance without further examination. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Would only have to show himself and remind her of all that spoke in his favour, and she would rue it and come back to him, especially if he should be in a position to justify his visit to those girls by some success due entirely to them. Tell him that it's very important that I should speak to him." Suddenly Jeremiah set off at a run. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. 
Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. And Frieda, and when he was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively and confidential and began to question them eagerly and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to an independent decision about what they should do. With a glass of beer in his hand which he should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch calling to him With a quieter mind K. But now Til have to tlirn them out myself." She took a whip from a corner and sprang among the dancers with a single bound, a little uncertainly, as a young lamb might spring. 

" On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre- taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguard themselves, within the terms of the regulations, against the night interrogations and their perhaps only apparent disadvantages. No one should deprive him of that now. -- But after a moment he regained his composure and said : ** My master wishes to know when he is to come   to the Castle to-morrow/' The answer : ** Tell your master, but do not forget a single word of the incss^igc : Even if he sends ten assistants to ask when he is to come he will always get the answer : Neither to-morrow nor at any other time." K. " On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre- taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguard themselves, within the terms of the regulations, against the night interrogations and their perhaps only apparent disadvantages. To-night I only thought of dropping in there for a minute to see whether Barnabas had come at last, for he had an important message which he should have brought long before. I don't know why he should seem a passionate person in your eyes. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. He was startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially opened sleep-drunken eyes. He was only very sorry that he should be having such impossible ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked best to put off his departure indefinitely. If she had suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy with Amalia. " Perhaps you know him, Mizzi You don't know him either No, we don't know him." " That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of the under-castellans." " My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin- tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons of all the under-castellans "   " Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take my word that he is one. But before I go into that I beg you, donf_Tt let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds domineering,  am no more domineering than I am inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way I should like to be treated myself." " How like a stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were much nearer to us before, were you not Your reserva- tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted )'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard to me either.f__ " If I speak diflerently from before," K. Besides it wasn't any real illness that she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, but all the same she would not leave the place, on account of her husband and children, besides, she was already better in health than she used to be. On the other hand he could not quite understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained on his account and the children's, but she could take the children with her, and she need not have to go away for any long time or for any great distance, even up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. 
That everything should be lost is yet more improbable than the most improbable thing itself. 

And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. How should files come to be there What did the maids care about files But the outcome was always the same^ abuse and threats uttered by the disappointed commission and passed on by the landlord. F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. The room is unfortunately, as I only now see, not so carefully prepared as I should have wished. Only when she was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our assistants are mere children who in spite of their age should still be at their desks in school. That's as it should be and dt's certainly Klamm's will. Otherwise they were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. Perhaps, my dear Land   Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he should have been moved at least to make enquiries the other departments about the affair. No one should deprive him of that now. And so that all should know what it was all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the outcome was certain. Certainly, Klamm will never speak to anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter   how much trouble this anybody may take, and no matter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I that fact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, never allow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself : why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endure seeing this anybody At any rate, it can't be proved, seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle- man nodded eagerly. Had no prcjper appreciation of it ; he, who with all his powers strove to get a glimpse of Klamm, valued very little, for example, the post of a Momus who was permitted to live in Klamm 's eye ; for it was not Klamm's environ- ment in itself that seemed to him worth striving for, but rather that he, K., he only and no one else, should attain to Klamm, and should attain to him not, to rest with him, but to go on beyond him, f_~farther yet, into the Castle. Left entirely to hen She sent them to her old friends, reminded people of her existence, complained that she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incited people against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival, begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing to Klamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to be spared and as if for this reason he must on no account be allowed to come down into tap-room. 


Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. " I can't believe that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you're right," said K., " but he's the only messenger that's sent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda, f_o all the more reason why you should beware of him." " Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that till now," said K. Was stamping through the snow outside f_" the path should have been shovelled free long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- ward f_" he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, still holding to the railings. Her favourite seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, well, there she sat and f_" we couldn't tell exactly what was wrong f_" used to doze or carry on long conversa- tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her lips. Where should it hang if not over the table and yet they found it insupportable. On Frieda's account K. F__ So it WiU the janitor,f__ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening all the time leaning on the handle of his broom : f__ This fine janitor who out of cowardice allows other people to be falsely accused of his own villainies.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., who had not missed the fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first uncontrollable fury of the teacher, f__ if the assistants had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being  l punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel between me and you, Mr. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. Then we should have lost you, and I confess that now you mean almost more to me than Barnabas's service in the Castle. But she's very bothered and unhappy on your account, can't work, lies in bed and sighs and complains all the time." ** Shall I go and see her " asked K. Why should I have come asked K. The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. " On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre- taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguard themselves, within the terms of the regulations, against the night interrogations and their perhaps only apparent disadvantages. How should files come to be there What did the maids care about files But the outcome was always the same^ abuse and threats uttered by the disappointed commission and passed on by the landlord. At last the Superintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu- ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said that you were a Land Surveyor after all and so should be able to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. Left entirely to hen She sent them to her old friends, reminded people of her existence, complained that she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incited people against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival, begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing to Klamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to be spared and as if for this reason he must on no account be allowed to come down into tap-room. What she represented to one as a way of sparing Klammf_Ts feelings she succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlord was concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klamm did not come any more. The worst thing about the story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easily have been made good, I don't know why you lay such exaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letter from Sortini shame Amalia for ever f_" which is what one would gather from your story, but that's a sheer impossibility, it would have been easy to make up for it to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing might have blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed, and not Amalia. At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. 
As for me, I confess it frankly, had h received a letter like that I should have gone. 

I would never and will 'never answer merely because of someone's office, neither then nor now/' Momus replied : 'f_~Of whom, th^, should we think Who else is there here  Look for yourself " In the hall they were met by an attendant who led them the old way, already known to K., across the court- yard, then into ihe entry and through the low, somewhat downward sloping passage. Would not be pat off and asked again : " What, you don't know the Count " " Why should I " replied the teacher in a low tone, and added aloud in French : " Please remember that there are innocent children present." K. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. If you delay much longer Erlanger will be down on me, and that is something I should very much like to avoid. F_~f_~ You should have come long ago," Erlanger said. To take the tray from her, set it on the floor, put his arm through hers, and walk her slowly up and down in the corner of the passage. 
For whom should they smarten themselves Nobody saw them, at best the staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough was welcome to smarten herself. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. And on the ground floor, but in the corner where the opposite wing of the house joined the main building, there was an entrance to the house, open, and without a door. 
Itf_Ts completely out of the question of course that I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterly improbable thing should happen after all and I should go to sleep while you are still here, then please stay quiet and don't open the door, either. No longer in her house ; if he had connections with the Castle, then he should take advantage of them at once, for he must leave the house that very day, that very minute, and she would only take him back again at the express order and command of the authorities ; but she hoped it would not come to that, for she too had connections with the Castle and f_>would know how to make use of them. 
Your family has a special interest for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest could give me cause for despising you I can't under- stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original cause of our being despised " " That would be strange f_>indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn Amalia for such an action, but despise her And even if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, why should the contempt be extended to you others, her innocent family For Pepi to despise you, for instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know   it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, K./' said Olga, f_~f_~ to convert all the people who despise us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all engineered from the Castle. Then he sat down in a corner and  Z neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had to attend to the last people there by ourselves as well as we could/* And where do you see in all this the influence of the Castle asked K. F_o Thatf_Ts valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klammf_Ts signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same f_" yet  wonf_Tt dare to advance it on my own unsupported word. Mizzi," he called, and then : f_o But what are you doing f__   the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had clearly not found the paper they were looking for, and had then tried to shut everything up again in the cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- abundance of papers had not succeeded. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. But things have never got that length yet, and Barnabas canf_Tt venture to do anything that might help towards it, although hef_Ts well aware that, young as he js, hef_Ts been raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief breadwinner in our family on account of this whole unfortunate affair. Now in these cir- cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards you If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. You were just the same as then, and all I wished was that the landlady had been here and could have listened to you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could still stick to her opinion. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, ** Who's there  he repeated, adding, '' I should be obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. Said, " that is because I want to be even nearer to you all than before, I want to be at home among you, cither I shall attach myself to you in this way or | not at all, either we shall make entirely common cause, with regard to Barnabas or we shall avoid even evefy tlecting, objectively unnecessary contact that w^Duld   compromise me and perhaps all of you too. Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed on account of the allair wurli the letter?f__ K. And that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he reached the door : The lady has been driven by force to leave the room with her children, because you have rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. Such negotiations lasted a very long time, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentleman would perhaps hand over part of the files or get other files as compensation, since all that had happened was that a mistake had been made ; but it also happened sometimes that someone simply had to abandon all the files demanded, either because he had been driven into a corner by the servant's evidence or because he was tired of the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not give rlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flung them out into the passage, so that the strings came undone and the papers flew about and the servants had a great deal of trouble getting everything straight again. But now the servant was no longer paying any further attention to the matter^ he had finished his job, he pointed to the handle of the little barrow, indicating that the otRer servant should take hold of it, and so they went away again as they had come, only more contentedly and so quickly that the little barrow bounced along ahead of them. No one should deprive him of that now. And so that all should know what it was all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the outcome was certain. It was as it should be then, only the grounds for it were obscure. Why should he have concerned himself about me, or better, how could he in any case have concerned himself about me He knew^nothing about me by that time. For my own part I don't know why he should fear that f_" my own opinion is that you should just be allowed to do what you like. But the Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this post would keep you out of difficulties, and that conse- quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ; he suggested further, that along with you we would obtain the services of your wife and your assistants, so that the school should be kept in first-rate order, and not only it, but the school-garden as well. Without knowing anything of the circumstances under' which K.*s appointment had come about, of the difficulties that it encountered in the community and at the Castle, of the complications that had already occurred during K.*s sojourn here or had been foreshadowed, without knowing anything of all this, indeed without even showing, what should have been expected of a secretary as a matter of course, that he had at least itn inkling of it all, he offered to settle the whole affair up there in no time at all with the aid of his little note-pad. To-night I only thought of dropping in there for a minute to see whether Barnabas had come at last, for he had an important message which he should have brought long before. 
So what should we do with a Land Surveyor ) f__ Though he had not given the matter a momentf_Ts thought before, K. Would only have to show himself and remind her of all that spoke in his favour, and she would rue it and come back to him, especially if he should be in a position to justify his visit to those girls by some success due entirely to them. 
Such negotiations lasted a very long time, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentleman would perhaps hand over part of the files or get other files as compensation, since all that had happened was that a mistake had been made ; but it also happened sometimes that someone simply had to abandon all the files demanded, either because he had been driven into a corner by the servant's evidence or because he was tired of the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not give rlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flung them out into the passage, so that the strings came undone and the papers flew about and the servants had a great deal of trouble getting everything straight again. Wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm f__ Olga laughed out loud. 'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. But I have heard grave complaints about you, on account of your behaviour this morning.f__ f__ Hef_Ts improving,f__ Gisa said, without i^lancing at K. You have no tender- ness to spare for me, you have hardly even time for me, you leave me to the assistants, the idea of being jealous never comes into your mind, my only value for you is tliat I was once Klammf_Ts sweetheart, in your ignorance you exert yourself to keep me from forgetting Klamm, so that when the decisive moment comes I should not make any resistance ; yet at the same time you carry on a feud with the landlady, the only one you think capable of separating me from you, and thatf_Ts why you brought your quarrel with her to a crisis, so as to have to leave the Bridge Inn with me ; but that, so far as Tm concerned, I belong to you whatever happens, you liavenf_Tt the slightest doubt. " He was the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the first time." K. Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. The fi;;st possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as agreement.f__ f__ There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more   plausible ones,f__ the landlady said, f__ if I do enter into your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing there.f__ f_oThat would change nothing,f__ K. Secretary, decide this question, whether what I may say here can get as far as Klamm or not." " Of course it can," said Momus, lowering his eyes proudly and gazing at nothing, " otherwise why should I be secretary here " "Now you see, madam," said K., " I don't need a road to Klamm, but only to Mr. 
Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. I am not going to say that the job is too grand for you ; It is, after all, not a very splendid job, perhaps, if one regards it closely, it is somewhat more honourable than your previous job, on the whole, however, the difference   is not great, both arc indeed so similar one can hardly distinguish between them; indeed, one might almost assert that being a chamber-maid is preferable to the tap- room, for there one is always among secretaries, here, on the other hand, even though one is allowed to serve the secretaries' chiefs in the private rooms, still, one also has to have a lot to do with quite common people, for instance with me ; actually I am not really supposed to sit about anywhere but right here in the tap-room f_" ^and is it such a great and glorious honour to assbeiate with me Well, it seems so to you, and perhaps you have your reasons for thinking so. This was unpleasant, for on account of the intense heat, which now towards morning had given way, however, to a coldness \^hich could be felt, they had all taken off everything but their shirts, and just as they were beginning to put on their clothes, Gisa, the lady teacher, appeared at the door, a fair, tall, beautiful, but somewhat stiff young woman. As for me, I confess it frankly, had h received a letter like that I should have gone. At any rate, all that should make Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you, and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they're comparatively reasonable, and even for those intimately affected by them much more endurable. 

In a few minutes the flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding  ll rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- body lay down round it, the assistants were given a blanket to roll themselves in f_" it was quite ample for them, for it was decided that one of them should always remain awake and keep the fire going f_" and soon it was so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer needed, the lamps were put out, and K. This was unpleasant, for on account of the intense heat, which now towards morning had given way, however, to a coldness \^hich could be felt, they had all taken off everything but their shirts, and just as they were beginning to put on their clothes, Gisa, the lady teacher, appeared at the door, a fair, tall, beautiful, but somewhat stiff young woman. 
Would not be pat off and asked again : " What, you don't know the Count " " Why should I " replied the teacher in a low tone, and added aloud in French : " Please remember that there are innocent children present." K. I should take Frieda's own word for this, even if I had not infallible evidence for it. You can see Frieda's merits very well for yourself, you notice her power of observation, her resolution, her influence on people, only you do, of course, interpret it all wrongly, believing she turns everything self-seekingly to account only for her own benefit and for evil purposes, or even as a weapon against you. Go along, what are you still doing here  No, you don't need to apologise for being sleepy, why should you  One's physical energies last only to a certain limit. " Perhaps you know him, Mizzi You don't know him either No, we don't know him." " That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of the under-castellans." " My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin- tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons of all the under-castellans "   " Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take my word that he is one. In general the letter means nothing more than that Klamm intends to take a personal interest in you if you should be taken into the state service." " Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letter so well that nothing remains of it but a signature on a blank sheet of paper. 
But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. That everything should be lost is yet more improbable than the most improbable thing itself. No one should deprive him of that now. And so that all should know what it was all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the outcome was certain. Since he's beside himself with fright   up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you force him to give an account of what he has seen you get simply confused fabrications. Still, I have no funda- mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why should it not# be feared Only one shouldnf_Tt suddenly send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, and then expect a truthful account of everything from him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a revelation, and base onef_Ts own lifef_Ts happiness on the in- terpretation. Too was very tired, perhaps it was from fatigue that he had not stood up to Jeremiah as he should have. You are surprised that I should have neither chair nor table here Well, I had the choice of getting either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- stand. Tve told you frankly about my experi- ences, from which you should have been able to learn something. 
For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. If you delay much longer Erlanger will be down on me, and that is something I should very much like to avoid. That everything should be lost is yet more improbable than the most improbable thing itself. 

To kce}> a watch over all this should really be the servantsf_T ]oh, but unfortunately they are so little to be depcnvled on that a large part of this work has to be done by us, not least by me, who am reputed to have a particularly shaip eye for these things. 
I would never and will 'never answer merely because of someone's office, neither then nor now/' Momus replied : 'f_~Of whom, th^, should we think Who else is there here  Look for yourself " In the hall they were met by an attendant who led them the old way, already known to K., across the court- yard, then into ihe entry and through the low, somewhat downward sloping passage. *Itf_Ts voluntary, of course, the work he does here.f__ f__ Then it would be better if he just slept on,f__ said Gerstacker, f__ for when he has a little time left for his work after he wakes, hef_Ts very vexed at having fallen asleep, and tries to get everything settled in a hurry, so that one can   hardly get a word in." " Youf_Tve come on account of the contract for the carting for* the new building " asked the servant. 
And have three years done that to him '' asked K., yet he could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only repulsion. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. Was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. K., startled out of his weariness by the new surroundings and Erlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtle dillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the f_~   schoolmasterf_" outwardly, too, there were litric points of resemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair ,ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and to left were absent that day f_" ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' as possible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcr had been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturb him he had gone away, then, of course, passed over in silence what he had been doing in the meantime, resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihs confusing the doors, and concluded by referring to his extraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be taken into consideration. It seems so to uc^ that does not mean fie is uneasyf_" how should uneasiness touch him? 
At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. He looked at the clock, and said : f_T My assistants should be arriving soon. I should like to see her again." To diminish the effect of what he said, K. Said, f__ I should not have heard during my conversation with him, which in any case would have to be conducted and therefore I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. Sordini countered : ' Why had I only mentioned this official order now ' I replied : f_~ Because I had just remembered it.' Sordini : f_~ That was very extra- ordinary.' Myself : f_~ It was not in the least extra- ordinary in such a long-drawn-out business.' Sordini ; f_~ Yes, it was extraordinary, for the order that I remem- bered didn't exist.' Myself : ' Of course it didn't exist, for the whole document had gone a-missing.' Sordini : f_~ But there must be a memorandum extant relating to this first communication, and there wasn't one extant.' That drew me up, for that an error should happen in Sordini's department I neither dared to maintain nor to believe. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. 
K., startled out of his weariness by the new surroundings and Erlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtle dillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the f_~   schoolmasterf_" outwardly, too, there were litric points of resemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair ,ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and to left were absent that day f_" ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' as possible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcr had been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturb him he had gone away, then, of course, passed over in silence what he had been doing in the meantime, resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihs confusing the doors, and concluded by referring to his extraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be taken into consideration. It seems so to uc^ that does not mean fie is uneasyf_" how should uneasiness touch him? Then we should have lost you, and I confess that now you mean almost more to me than Barnabas's service in the Castle. Yet the position of both of them was very bad in any case, just for that reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was f_" that was expressly insisted on f_" only a temporary post ,* one would gain a little time and would easily find other chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be unfavourable. After a long search she had found them below peacefully eating their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet she, who knew how to keep the common people in their places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. C.ould I diminish   it, I should get the answers. On Frieda's account K. But although she doesn't bother about us we're as dependent on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise   us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice, only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. And froih all appearances one would only be doing the assistants a   favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., was occupied in finding a way out of their painful positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry out all the school work in addition to his other duties. He asked why this was so and got the answer that they should be only too thankful to Erlanger. " I should like to have a bit of a look at it," K. Repeated, and the weariness he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had commanded  that they should stay with her He could quite well have found his own way home, and better done, in- deed, than in this company. Besides, it isn't laid down that I should go at once with every message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, nothing could be said to me. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out from a corner : ** Let K. At home they had called him f_o The Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Must not wait near the house f_" again it was sensitiveness on his mother's account that dictated his reaction f_" K. 


And theref_Ts just one thing, one thing my poor head canf_Tt understand, that a girl who had the honour of being known as Klammf_Ts mistress f_" a wild exaggeration in my opinion f_" should have allowed you even to lay a finger on her.f__ f__ Most certainly, thatf_Ts remarkable,f__ said K., drawing Frieda to his bosom f_" she submitted at once although with bent head f_" f__ but in my opinion that only proves the possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. Her favourite seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, well, there she sat and f_" we couldn't tell exactly what was wrong f_" used to doze or carry on long conversa- tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her lips. Where should it hang if not over the table and yet they found it insupportable. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? 
Of course it would be still fimore reasonable of Barnabas when he's up there to ask a few people about the truth of things, for judging from his account there are plenty of men standing round. Said, f__ that that is better, I donf_Tt think that it is better for Barnabas to go on leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up people feeding on baby-food, I donf_Tt think that thaii is better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,   under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ in the room where he already is. But before I go into that I beg you, donf_Tt let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds domineering,  am no more domineering than I am inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way I should like to be treated myself." " How like a stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were much nearer to us before, were you not Your reserva- tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted )'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard to me either.f__ " If I speak diflerently from before," K. Secretary," asked K., " read the protocol " "No," replied Momus, " why should he Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. Do you think it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm should read this protocol and become acquainted word for word with the trivialities of your life Shouldn't you rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- cealed from Klamm f_" a prayer, however, that would be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide anything from Klamm even though he has given many signs of his sympathetic nature And is it even ^ necessary for what you call your hope Haven't you admitted yourself that you would be content if you only  gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never looked at you and never listened to you And won't you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps much more " f_o Much more " asked K. " Think it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to be examined." " Why do you bring that up now asked K. "You mean that I should be proud to have won such a reticent girl " " That's so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had established a secret understanding with K. And on the ground floor, but in the corner where the opposite wing of the house joined the main building, there was an entrance to the house, open, and without a door. 
Only at one little table in the corner was a married couple seated already with a few children. 
Our mother was the feeblest of us dl, probably because she had not only endured our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. "He must have gone out long ago." " But I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in here," said Frieda coolly. All the same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from   seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely Aron account of the miscarrying of my plan If at one time you can advise me sincerely from your heart against trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may not reach as far as him '' ** Am I driving you on " asked the landlady. 
F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. This must not be allowed to happen, even if the landlord and the landlady should unite against him. He thanked them for having put an end to the distressing scene, if he should be taken to task about the matter it would be very welcome to him, for only in this way could he prevent a general mis- interpretation of his behaviour. Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised what a condition he was in and they would certainly have looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that interrogationf_" and how then should K. To be honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the impossible should have happened, and his prayer have really reached an official's ear. 
