Short Prose Dream 20201222102923332671

K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. 
Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. What- ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." Petitions " And what did we do meanwhile The worst thing we could have done, something much more deserving of contempt than our original offence f_" we betrayed Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- ness. 

" Anyway, I shall not take up much of your time," Erlanger said, " I only want to ask a favour of you." Suddenly, however, lie remembered something, it now became apparent that he had all the time been vaguely thinking of something that was distracting him and that the severity with which he had spoken to K. " \ou*re going a little too far, my good " fellow, and I'E have something to say to-morrow abotit your conduct. What- ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." Petitions " And what did we do meanwhile The worst thing we could have done, something much more deserving of contempt than our original offence f_" we betrayed Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- ness. 
" Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. 

I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. As soon as her eye met K.f_Ts it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning hjm- self, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. 

But barren of results as all this time was in other ways, it had a good effect on Barnabas, if one can call it a good thing that he grew prematurely old, became a man before his time, yes, even in some ways more grave and sensible than most men. 
Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my own position was still insecure f_" how insecure it was, I did not even realise f_" and I was already talking to the ^ landlord about Henriette and Emilie. 
So I always find something or other to say to him, such as ' What are you really   ^ aiming at, Barnabas What kind of career, wha ambition arc you dreaming of? " Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that the woman had now returned with the candle and was kneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn't I help your wife to look for it " The Superintendent smilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don't want to make any parade of official secrecy before you, but to let you look through these papers yourself f_" no, I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room, only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; it looked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super- intendent were dozing. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. If I keep ant thing from you, it is only from fear of you, and this fear is something I do not hide from you, but show quire openly. Being here in the warmth was something to be thankful for and one had to take precautions against being driven out. That was something they simply could not face. Someone who rode rough- shod over everything, both over the law and over the most ordinary human consideration, with this callous indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not care that he was making the distribution of the files almost impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and who brought about something that had never happened before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this person on whom nothing else could make any impression They, the gentlemen, calling for help Would not the landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come   dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and flien disappear again at once Quivering with indigna- tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. Here, too, her girl friends helped our as best they could, but they could not do much. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. 
He has something of Amalia in him. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. 
Someone who rode rough- shod over everything, both over the law and over the most ordinary human consideration, with this callous indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not care that he was making the distribution of the files almost impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and who brought about something that had never happened before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this person on whom nothing else could make any impression They, the gentlemen, calling for help Would not the landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come   dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and flien disappear again at once Quivering with indigna- tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. " Because it's my whim." replied the teacher,   and now I repeat for the last time, get out But as that too had no effect the teacher went over to the table and consulted in a whisper with Fraulein Gisa ; she said something about the police, but the teacher rejected it, finally they seemed in agreement, the teacher ordered the children to go into his classroom, they would be taught there along with the other children. And when I'm lying beside you at night I can't sleep and must always be leaning across you to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleep in the blanket and the other kneeling before the stove door putting in wood, and I have to bend forward so far that I nearly waken you. Now up in the Castle we must rest content with whatever our lot z&o  happens to be, but down here we can, it may be, do something ourselves, tl^at is, make sure of your good-will, or at least save ourselves from your dislike, or, what's more important, protect you as far as our strength and experience go, so that your connection with the Castlef_" by which we might perhaps be helped too f_" might not be lost. When an ail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it may happen, even before the matter has been fully con- sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes in some unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be found any longer later on, a decision that settles the matter, if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. At a desk in the middle of the room   in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his face brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung low before him. If he had been planted sqjiarely before his desk K. And when I'm lying beside you at night I can't sleep and must always be leaning across you to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleep in the blanket and the other kneeling before the stove door putting in wood, and I have to bend forward so far that I nearly waken you. Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleep away all his stay in the village, and then when he woke to have to leave again immediately for the Castle. So something must have changed on your side, through the of strangers or in some way or other. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. Yes, he even forbade me to light the fires early, because he thought that you had shown by locking the wood- shed that you didn't want them to be put on before you came yourself. But I don't want to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get you as far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before it reaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decide that. Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. 
Klamm gives nothing of himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about there, one can get it out of him.f__ f_> K. " I donf_Tt doubt that for a moment, but we were speaking of the time before your marriage, and it must have been an extraordinary thing at that stage for Hansf_Ts family to on the marriage f_" at a money sacrifice, or at least at such a great risk as the handing over of the inn must have been f_" and without trusting in anything but your   powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, and Hans's powers of work, which everybody must have known beforehand were nil." " Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I know what you're getting at and how wide you are of the mark. And finally, as we might have foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of the Fire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me, Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop from weakness in the lungs, a serious man who never could laugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired, whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputy Captain, and to whom he had now to say that the Brigade required his services no longer and asked for the return of his diploma. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. There was something imperious in his character, but   it was so mingled with childish innocence that they submitted to it without resistance, half-smilingly, half in earnest. Itm II too, these questions seemed useless, he admitted that the boy was right ; besides there was something humiliating in ferreting out family secrets by taking advantage of a child ; doubly humiliating, however, was the fact that in spite of his effort she had learned nothing. Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. Now fromrthis foolproofness it does result that everyone who has any petition or who must be interrogated in any matter for other reasons, instantly, without delay, usually indeed even before he has worked the matter out for himself, more, indeed, even before he himself knows of it, lias  ? And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. 
Now he at least felt strong enough to go before Erlanger. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. 
As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. Ever seen it lijce that either before oi since f_" he had succeeded in climbing it with astonishing ease ; at a place where he had already slipped down many a time he had clambered with a small flag between his teeth right to the top at the first attempt. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. Just then Frieda opened one of the windows so as to air the room before putting on the fire, as she had promised K. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. Yet before he could be forgiven he had to prove his guilt, and that was denied in all the bureaux. I replied, drawing on Mizzi's splendid memory, that the first suggestion had come from the chancellory itself (but that it had come from a different department we had of course forgotten long before this). " Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. So I always find something or other to say to him, such as ' What are you really   ^ aiming at, Barnabas What kind of career, wha ambition arc you dreaming of? 
K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. The passage itself was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, who was sitting before one of the doors. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. As soon as her eye met K.f_Ts it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning hjm- self, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. Klamm gives nothing of himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about there, one can get it out of him.f__ f_> K. " I donf_Tt doubt that for a moment, but we were speaking of the time before your marriage, and it must have been an extraordinary thing at that stage for Hansf_Ts family to on the marriage f_" at a money sacrifice, or at least at such a great risk as the handing over of the inn must have been f_" and without trusting in anything but your   powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, and Hans's powers of work, which everybody must have known beforehand were nil." " Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I know what you're getting at and how wide you are of the mark. Did his best to find every- thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating his message word for word, not however as he had given it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before Klamm. And there she whispered something so low that K. 

How startled I was f_" but that was only a superficial fear without   deeper causef_" when you said to-day that before you knew me you had gone about here in a blind circle. 
When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is something he's pretty good at. The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. The landlady doesn't claim to know what you want from Klamm, she merely maintains that before you knew me you strove as eagerly to reach Klamm as you have done since. Now he at least felt strong enough to go before Erlanger. Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. Then when the worst was past and father was able again to struggle cautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him on each side, Amalia withdrew into the background again and left him to us."   Olga's Plans *' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupation for father that he was still fit for, something that at least would make him believe that he was helping to remove the burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of the kind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact would have been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch's garden, but \ found something that actually gave me a little hope. Now all that was sufficient cause for you to become my lover for one night, but something more was needed to turn it into a more serious affair. And that something more was Klamm. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. 
What special things had he in mind Was he going to achieve something special A good appointment, a distinction Was he after something of that sort Well, then he ought to have set about things differently from the very beginning. Well, so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day, shortly before lunch-time. Had never before heard on a telephone. A man came cleaving his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed before K. Here before your eyes I snap this switch which was intended for you, for it wasnf_Tt for fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so as to surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a few times. When an ail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it may happen, even before the matter has been fully con- sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes in some unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be found any longer later on, a decision that settles the matter, if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. Being here in the warmth was something to be thankful for and one had to take precautions against being driven out. The landlord and his wife were still standing before him as though even now he still constituted a certain menace, as^ chough in view of his utter unreliability it were not quite impossible that he might here suddenly start up and try to invade the passage once again. F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. If I keep ant thing from you, it is only from fear of you, and this fear is something I do not hide from you, but show quire openly. Why did you come Were you really the great man foj* whom we had taken you, if you cared to come into our poor parlour Why did you not stay in your own place, waiting for the messenger to come up to you, as it became your dignity, sending him away instantly Did you not take away something of the importance of Barnabasf_Ts appointment as a messenger, by the fact that you had come Besides, though you were foreign in )^our dress, you were poorly dressed, and sadly I turned this way and that the wet coat that I took off you that time. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. 
Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. 
  then he gave a start, and seemed to be looking round for something he had only just missedf_" but there was nothing missingf_" and said tliat Brunswick had told him some story of a messenger and a torn-up letter, did we know anything of it, who was concerned in it, and what it was all about  We kept silent ; Barnabas, who was as youthful then as a spring Iamb, said something particularly silly or cheeky, the subject was changed, and the whole affair forgottefi/* Amaliaf_Ts Punishment ** But not long afterwards we were overwhelmed with questions from all sides about the story of the letter, we were visited by friends and enemies, acquaint- ances and complete strangers. " Yes," the gentle- mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. 
In that case it might even have been part of my plan to appear before you arm-in-arm with Olga so as to evoke your pity, and the landlady has simply forgotten to mention that too in her list of my offences. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. Followed the hint, for he was shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a little table f_" which must have been specially set out, for usually the customers put up with upturned barrels f_" the young gentleman, and standing before him f_" an unwelcome sight for K. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Fought for something vitally near to him, for himself, and moreover, at least at the very beginning, on his own ^initiative, for he was the attacker ; and besides he fought not only for himself, but clearly for other powers as well which he did not know, but in which, without infringing the regulations of the authorities, he was permitted to believe. The voices were muffled, only a word here and there could be indistinctly made out, it did not seem to be conversation either, probably someone was only dictating something ot reading something aloud ; and precisely from the rooms where there was a clinking of glasses and plates no word was to be heard, and the hammering reminded K. Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my own position was still insecure f_" how insecure it was, I did not even realise f_" and I was already talking to the ^ landlord about Henriette and Emilie. 
Taking a long breath, she wiped a lew tears from her eyes and cheeks and then looWd at K.,   nodding, as if meaning to say that at bottom what mattered was not her misfortune at all, she would bear it all right, for that she needed neither help nor comfort from anyone at all, and least of all from K., even though she was so young she knew something about life, and her misfortune was only a confirmation of what she knew already, but what mattered was K., she had wanted to show him what he himseff was like, even after the collapse of all her hopes she had thought it necessary to do that. 


How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. Here before your eyes I snap this switch which was intended for you, for it wasnf_Tt for fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so as to surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a few times. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. The passage itself was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, who was sitting before one of the doors. 
Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. 

If I keep ant thing from you, it is only from fear of you, and this fear is something I do not hide from you, but show quire openly. When an ail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it may happen, even before the matter has been fully con- sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes in some unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be found any longer later on, a decision that settles the matter, if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. 
Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. But apart from that Klamm is also the root cause of your illness, for before your marriage your heart was already worn out with your hopeless passion for him. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. 
Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. 

Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. Even Pepi was touched, not even she could remain quite unmoved, even though her attention was actually focussed on something else. Klamm gives nothing of himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about there, one can get it out of him.f__ f_> K. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Just then Frieda opened one of the windows so as to air the room before putting on the fire, as she had promised K. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. 
" Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that the woman had now returned with the candle and was kneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn't I help your wife to look for it " The Superintendent smilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don't want to make any parade of official secrecy before you, but to let you look through these papers yourself f_" no, I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room, only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; it looked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super- intendent were dozing. If he had been planted sqjiarely before his desk K. This babel of voices in the rooms had something extremely merry about it. Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. Just then Frieda opened one of the windows so as to air the room before putting on the fire, as she had promised K. When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. Here, too, her girl friends helped our as best they could, but they could not do much. You were betraying that woman even before you had won her. In that case it might even have been part of my plan to appear before you arm-in-arm with Olga so as to evoke your pity, and the landlady has simply forgotten to mention that too in her list of my offences. But her admonition was in vain, for her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my own position was still insecure f_" how insecure it was, I did not even realise f_" and I was already talking to the ^ landlord about Henriette and Emilie. Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. And something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; It would be even more if you came to see us more often. Said, ** why I mean something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my own. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. Surely you donf_Tt want me to undertake something and, as a consequence of insufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances and for that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage you and myself in a way that is beyond repair.f__ f__ No, K.,f__ Olga said after a pause, f__ I donf_Tt want that and there- fore it would be better if everything could be left as it was,f__ f__ I donf_Tt think,f__ K. Many a one before now has lost the game because, thinking he was not making progress with the competent authority, he tried to slip through by approaching some other, one not competent. Burgel's quiet, self-satisfied voice, which was obviously doing its best to put its owner to sleep, was something he had now become so used to that it would do more to put him to sleep than to disturb him. 



But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. The voices were muffled, only a word here and there could be indistinctly made out, it did not seem to be conversation either, probably someone was only dictating something ot reading something aloud ; and precisely from the rooms where there was a clinking of glasses and plates no word was to be heard, and the hammering reminded K. The passage itself was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, who was sitting before one of the doors. 
'' I certainly had no doubts about yoi and if I have acquired something of the kind from tl landlady, I'll be only too glad to throw it off and be you for forgiveness on my knees, as I do, believe m all the time, even when I'm saying such horrible thing But the truth remains that you keep man^ things fro: me ; you come and go, I don't know where or fro: where. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. Now fromrthis foolproofness it does result that everyone who has any petition or who must be interrogated in any matter for other reasons, instantly, without delay, usually indeed even before he has worked the matter out for himself, more, indeed, even before he himself knows of it, lias  ? 
So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. 
Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. 

Yet before he could be forgiven he had to prove his guilt, and that was denied in all the bureaux. Now all that was sufficient cause for you to become my lover for one night, but something more was needed to turn it into a more serious affair. And that something more was Klamm. " Because it's my whim." replied the teacher,   and now I repeat for the last time, get out But as that too had no effect the teacher went over to the table and consulted in a whisper with Fraulein Gisa ; she said something about the police, but the teacher rejected it, finally they seemed in agreement, the teacher ordered the children to go into his classroom, they would be taught there along with the other children. 
I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. 


F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. They are true friends." f_o Oh, true friends," said K., f_~f_~ they keep spying on me the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable." " I believe I know what you mean," she said, and she clung to his neck and tried to say something else but could not go on speaking, and since their chair was ^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. F_o Since Frieda puts such confidence in you," cried K., f_o I must do the same, and since not long ago Frieda called my assistants true friends we are all friends together. 

Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. Many a one before now has lost the game because, thinking he was not making progress with the competent authority, he tried to slip through by approaching some other, one not competent. 
" Anyway, I shall not take up much of your time," Erlanger said, " I only want to ask a favour of you." Suddenly, however, lie remembered something, it now became apparent that he had all the time been vaguely thinking of something that was distracting him and that the severity with which he had spoken to K. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. So I have been told by the landlady, from whom I have all this, :she said she must open my eyes for me about various things before I marry. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. Ei;lflnger had already arrived, but he was consulting first with Momus before he admitted his clients. As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. I bowed before her triumph and I felt that everyone must bow before her, perhaps what amazed us so much was the difference in her appearance, for she wasn't really beautiful, but her sombre glance, and it has kept the same quality since that day, was high over ourlieads and involuntarily one had almost literally to bow before her. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? 


For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. He has something of Amalia in him. 
" Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. As soon as her eye met K.f_Ts it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning hjm- self, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. At a desk in the middle of the room   in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his face brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung low before him. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. Almost allowed himself to be seduced by it again into believing Barnabas f_" " I'll certiinly see to it, and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me last time as well." " What " cried K., " haven't you seen to that yet then  Weren't you at the Castle next ay " " No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seen him yourself, and there happened to be a great deal of work just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be going to the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinking of, you incomprehensible fellow  " cried K., beating his brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs come before everything else, then You're in an important position, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me in this wretched manner What does your father's work matter  Klamm is waiting for this information, and instead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him, you prefer to clean the stable " " My father is a cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had orders from Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant." " Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. Had forgotten himself while he was speaking, it was as if he were standing before Klamm's door talking to the porter. 

So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. He could not say anything to his mother before his* father left, otherwise his father would come to hear of it and the whole plan would be scotched, and so he could only mention it later ; but even then, out of consideration for his mother, it could not be mentioned    suddenly and startlingly, but must be said slowly and when a suitable opportunity occurred ; only then could he beg his mother to agree, only then could he fetch K. Then shall remain good friends in spite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihout your friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lo spend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting, only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot be postponed, could have justified that." K. 
How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. I replied, drawing on Mizzi's splendid memory, that the first suggestion had come from the chancellory itself (but that it had come from a different department we had of course forgotten long before this). It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. 
The passage itself was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, who was sitting before one of the doors. Taking a long breath, she wiped a lew tears from her eyes and cheeks and then looWd at K.,   nodding, as if meaning to say that at bottom what mattered was not her misfortune at all, she would bear it all right, for that she needed neither help nor comfort from anyone at all, and least of all from K., even though she was so young she knew something about life, and her misfortune was only a confirmation of what she knew already, but what mattered was K., she had wanted to show him what he himseff was like, even after the collapse of all her hopes she had thought it necessary to do that. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. But Frieda means something to me, I have trusted her completely and want to go on trusting her, and it surprises me that you go out of your way, while discussing Amalia, to attack Frieda and try to shake my confidence in her. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. To Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com- manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he   wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. 

For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. And then immediately, before there was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of communication, had come about, of which for the present only K. F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. Followed the hint, for he was shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a little table f_" which must have been specially set out, for usually the customers put up with upturned barrels f_" the young gentleman, and standing before him f_" an unwelcome sight for K. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. 

Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. And then immediately, before there was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of communication, had come about, of which for the present only K. At last they stopped before a door which was not in any way different from the others, and yet behind which, so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleep away all his stay in the village, and then when he woke to have to leave again immediately for the Castle. But before I go into that I beg you, donf_Tt let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds domineering,  am no more domineering than I am inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way I should like to be treated myself." " How like a stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were much nearer to us before, were you not Your reserva- tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted )'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard to me either.f__ " If I speak diflerently from before," K. From the school, and this not before his mother knew of it and gave permission. But her admonition was in vain, for her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. For let me point out that theref_Ts always something f_" I donf_Tt know what it is f_" that hinders you from seeing clearly how much Barnabas has f_" I'll not say achieved f_" but has had bestowed on him. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. As soon as her eye met K.f_Ts it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning hjm- self, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. Perhaps f_" it would be a bad thing, but it is possible f_" perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when I marry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I am free, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thijA- visit of mine to you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but I am still free, I can still, if something seems to me as important as Barnabasf_Ts affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it as exhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. 
Had forgotten himself while he was speaking, it was as if he were standing before Klamm's door talking to the porter. Had carried out the pail with the dirty water, fetched fresh water, and was beginning to turn out the classroom, a boy of about twelve stepped out from his desk, touched K.'s hand, and said something which was quite lost in the general uproar. Yes, he even forbade me to light the fires early, because he thought that you had shown by locking the wood- shed that you didn't want them to be put on before you came yourself. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. 
And when I'm lying beside you at night I can't sleep and must always be leaning across you to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleep in the blanket and the other kneeling before the stove door putting in wood, and I have to bend forward so far that I nearly waken you. Pepi saw her the very same morning before she moved out, the staff all came running up, after all, everyone was curious to see the sight. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. In appearance good, childish, merry, irre- sponsible youths, fallen from the sky, from the Castle, a dash of childhood's memories with them too ; all that of course must have seemed very nice, especially when I was the antithesis of it all, and was always running after affairs moreover which were scarcely compre- hensible, which were exasperating to you, and which threw me together with people whom you considered deserving of your hate f_" something of which you carried over to me too, in spite of all my innocence. But f_" not to speak of anything else   f_"you were torn away from Klamm, I can't calculate how much that must have meant, but a vague idea of it Ive managed to arrive at gradually, you stumbled, you couldn't find yourself, and ^ven if I was always ready to help you, still I wasn't always there, and when I was there you were held captive by your dreams or by something more palpable, the landlady, sayf_" in short there were times when you^ turned away from me, longed, poor^ child, for vague inexpressible things, and at those periods any passable man had only to come within your range of vision and you lost yourself to him. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. They are true friends." f_o Oh, true friends," said K., f_~f_~ they keep spying on me the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable." " I believe I know what you mean," she said, and she clung to his neck and tried to say something else but could not go on speaking, and since their chair was ^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. What importance, for example, had the power, merely formal up till now, which Klamm exercised over K.'s services, compared with the very real power which Klamm possessed in K.f_Ts bedroom So it came about that while a light and frivolous bearing, a certain deliberate lessness was sufficient when one came in direct contact with the authorities, one needed in everything else the greatest caution, and had to look round on every side before one made a single step. " Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that the woman had now returned with the candle and was kneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn't I help your wife to look for it " The Superintendent smilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don't want to make any parade of official secrecy before you, but to let you look through these papers yourself f_" no, I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room, only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; it looked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super- intendent were dozing. 

The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. 
I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. 
Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. " Yes," the gentle- mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. 

You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. Besides, before I'm married theref_Ts something I must do. 
" Anyway, I shall not take up much of your time," Erlanger said, " I only want to ask a favour of you." Suddenly, however, lie remembered something, it now became apparent that he had all the time been vaguely thinking of something that was distracting him and that the severity with which he had spoken to K. 
The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. " Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. 


How revolting all that had been, and all the more revolting because this impression could not be explained by derails^, for though one listed the details in order to have something to hold on to, they were not bad, it was something else about it all that one could not put a name to. What is held against you is obviously nothing but the fact that you are aiming higher than others ; the fact that Barnabas has beco'h^e a Castle messenger* or is trying to become one* is something for which people bear you a grudge ; in order to avoid having to admire you, they despise you, and they do it with such intensity that even you yourselves are defeated by it. I do not know whether it is like this, and my own guilt is by no means clear to me, only when I compare myself with you something of this kind dawns on me : it is as if we had both striven too intensely, too noisily, too childishly, with too little experience, to get some- thing that for instance with Frieda's calm and Frieda's matter-of-factness can be got easily and without much ado. At a desk in the middle of the room   in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his face brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung low before him. He had been persuaded that in this village everybody meant something to him, and indeed he was   not mistaken, it was only for these people here that he could feel not the slightest interest. He could not say anything to his mother before his* father left, otherwise his father would come to hear of it and the whole plan would be scotched, and so he could only mention it later ; but even then, out of consideration for his mother, it could not be mentioned    suddenly and startlingly, but must be said slowly and when a suitable opportunity occurred ; only then could he beg his mother to agree, only then could he fetch K. 
Fought for something vitally near to him, for himself, and moreover, at least at the very beginning, on his own ^initiative, for he was the attacker ; and besides he fought not only for himself, but clearly for other powers as well which he did not know, but in which, without infringing the regulations of the authorities, he was permitted to believe. What importance, for example, had the power, merely formal up till now, which Klamm exercised over K.'s services, compared with the very real power which Klamm possessed in K.f_Ts bedroom So it came about that while a light and frivolous bearing, a certain deliberate lessness was sufficient when one came in direct contact with the authorities, one needed in everything else the greatest caution, and had to look round on every side before one made a single step. 
There was something imperious in his character, but   it was so mingled with childish innocence that they submitted to it without resistance, half-smilingly, half in earnest. 
I do not know whether it is like this, and my own guilt is by no means clear to me, only when I compare myself with you something of this kind dawns on me : it is as if we had both striven too intensely, too noisily, too childishly, with too little experience, to get some- thing that for instance with Frieda's calm and Frieda's matter-of-factness can be got easily and without much ado. Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my own position was still insecure f_" how insecure it was, I did not even realise f_" and I was already talking to the ^ landlord about Henriette and Emilie. And something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; It would be even more if you came to see us more often. Said, ** why I mean something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my own. That it was too late to present myself at the Castle I knew very well before you saw fit to inform me. " Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. 
And when I'm lying beside you at night I can't sleep and must always be leaning across you to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleep in the blanket and the other kneeling before the stove door putting in wood, and I have to bend forward so far that I nearly waken you. To Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com- manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he   wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. 
That it was too late to present myself at the Castle I knew very well before you saw fit to inform me. At a desk in the middle of the room   in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his face brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung low before him. Someone who rode rough- shod over everything, both over the law and over the most ordinary human consideration, with this callous indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not care that he was making the distribution of the files almost impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and who brought about something that had never happened before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this person on whom nothing else could make any impression They, the gentlemen, calling for help Would not the landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come   dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and flien disappear again at once Quivering with indigna- tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. F_~f_~ Yesterday, I think, you had the impudence to say something about my dress.'" K. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. What- ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." Petitions " And what did we do meanwhile The worst thing we could have done, something much more deserving of contempt than our original offence f_" we betrayed Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- ness. 

This seemed to have a good effect, the man in the bed pulled the quilt a little off his face, anxiously ready, however, to cover himself up again completely if something was not quite all right out there. It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. Did his best to find every- thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating his message word for word, not however as he had given it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before Klamm. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. Had had a similar chance he would have been delighted to take it and would gladly have done without all the prohibited insight into what was going on there, and this all the more lightheartedly since in reality he had been quite incapable of seeing anything, for which reason even the most sensitive gentlemen could have shown themselves before him without embarrassment. There was nothing else that could be imagined that could have brought Frieda to give up her situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like a spider in its web, with all the threads under her control, threads of which no one knew but she ; it would have been quite impossible to winkle her out against her will, only love for some lowly person, that is to say, something that was not in keeping with her position, could drive her from her place. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. 
Someone who rode rough- shod over everything, both over the law and over the most ordinary human consideration, with this callous indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not care that he was making the distribution of the files almost impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and who brought about something that had never happened before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this person on whom nothing else could make any impression They, the gentlemen, calling for help Would not the landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come   dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and flien disappear again at once Quivering with indigna- tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. Being here in the warmth was something to be thankful for and one had to take precautions against being driven out. He has something of Amalia in him. So something must have changed on your side, through the of strangers or in some way or other. There was nothing else that could be imagined that could have brought Frieda to give up her situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like a spider in its web, with all the threads under her control, threads of which no one knew but she ; it would have been quite impossible to winkle her out against her will, only love for some lowly person, that is to say, something that was not in keeping with her position, could drive her from her place. As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. 
Why did you come Were you really the great man foj* whom we had taken you, if you cared to come into our poor parlour Why did you not stay in your own place, waiting for the messenger to come up to you, as it became your dignity, sending him away instantly Did you not take away something of the importance of Barnabasf_Ts appointment as a messenger, by the fact that you had come Besides, though you were foreign in )^our dress, you were poorly dressed, and sadly I turned this way and that the wet coat that I took off you that time. Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. And then immediately, before there was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of communication, had come about, of which for the present only K. And something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; It would be even more if you came to see us more often. Said, ** why I mean something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my own. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. This seemed to have a good effect, the man in the bed pulled the quilt a little off his face, anxiously ready, however, to cover himself up again completely if something was not quite all right out there. It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. 
Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. Then deep in thought Hans stared in ftont of him for a little f_" just like a woman who wants to do something forbidden and seeks an opportunity to do it without being punished f_" ^and said that the day after to-morrow it might be possible, his father was going to the Herrenhof in the evening, he had a conference there ; then he, Hans, would come in the evening and take K. 

Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. IVoin the questions you will at least indirectly learn something of what is in the protocol and through your answers you will be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.f__ f__I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,f__ K. 
F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. " Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. In everybody that wanders about in the street " I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying to justify himself before this still invisible personage. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. Go back to your girls ; they sit beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you they spit at him. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. " I donf_Tt doubt that for a moment, but we were speaking of the time before your marriage, and it must have been an extraordinary thing at that stage for Hansf_Ts family to on the marriage f_" at a money sacrifice, or at least at such a great risk as the handing over of the inn must have been f_" and without trusting in anything but your   powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, and Hans's powers of work, which everybody must have known beforehand were nil." " Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I know what you're getting at and how wide you are of the mark. I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. " Anyway, I shall not take up much of your time," Erlanger said, " I only want to ask a favour of you." Suddenly, however, lie remembered something, it now became apparent that he had all the time been vaguely thinking of something that was distracting him and that the severity with which he had spoken to K. " \ou*re going a little too far, my good " fellow, and I'E have something to say to-morrow abotit your conduct. 
Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. 
Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. 
Had carried out the pail with the dirty water, fetched fresh water, and was beginning to turn out the classroom, a boy of about twelve stepped out from his desk, touched K.'s hand, and said something which was quite lost in the general uproar. 
F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? 
And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. Just then Frieda opened one of the windows so as to air the room before putting on the fire, as she had promised K. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Ever seen it lijce that either before oi since f_" he had succeeded in climbing it with astonishing ease ; at a place where he had already slipped down many a time he had clambered with a small flag between his teeth right to the top at the first attempt. 

Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. Oh, you are fine   fellows said K., do you know anything about sur- veying ** No/' said they, But if you are my old assistants you must know something about it/' said K. There's a great official in the Castle called Sortini." " I've heard of him already," said K., " he had something to do with bring- ing me here." " I don't think so," said Olga, " Sortini 'hardly ever comes into the open. 
F_~f_~ Yesterday, I think, you had the impudence to say something about my dress.'" K. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. There was nothing else that could be imagined that could have brought Frieda to give up her situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like a spider in its web, with all the threads under her control, threads of which no one knew but she ; it would have been quite impossible to winkle her out against her will, only love for some lowly person, that is to say, something that was not in keeping with her position, could drive her from her place. As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. Besides, before I'm married theref_Ts something I must do. 
Almost allowed himself to be seduced by it again into believing Barnabas f_" " I'll certiinly see to it, and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me last time as well." " What " cried K., " haven't you seen to that yet then  Weren't you at the Castle next ay " " No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seen him yourself, and there happened to be a great deal of work just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be going to the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinking of, you incomprehensible fellow  " cried K., beating his brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs come before everything else, then You're in an important position, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me in this wretched manner What does your father's work matter  Klamm is waiting for this information, and instead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him, you prefer to clean the stable " " My father is a cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had orders from Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant." " Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleep away all his stay in the village, and then when he woke to have to leave again immediately for the Castle. So something must have changed on your side, through the of strangers or in some way or other. F_o Since Frieda puts such confidence in you," cried K., f_o I must do the same, and since not long ago Frieda called my assistants true friends we are all friends together. 
If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. As soon as he had gone f_" before opening the door he had leaned his shoulder against it for a moment and embraced the room generally in a final glance f_" K. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. Now fromrthis foolproofness it does result that everyone who has any petition or who must be interrogated in any matter for other reasons, instantly, without delay, usually indeed even before he has worked the matter out for himself, more, indeed, even before he himself knows of it, lias  ? It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. " Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. And there she whispered something so low that K. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. 

But she lost prestige with people, that, of course, she could not fail to notice, indeed she usually noticed things even before they existed. The officials preferred indeed to get through their business in the taproom or in their rooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bed before retiring for the night, or in the morning when they were too weary to get up and wanted to stretch themselves for a little longer. 
If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. 
She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. And finally, as we might have foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of the Fire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me, Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop from weakness in the lungs, a serious man who never could laugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired, whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputy Captain, and to whom he had now to say that the Brigade required his services no longer and asked for the return of his diploma. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. Had forgotten himself while he was speaking, it was as if he were standing before Klamm's door talking to the porter. Did his best to find every- thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating his message word for word, not however as he had given it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before Klamm. 
All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. Answered : f_~f_~I know, but I don't want you to wait here." It annoyed him, however, and yet in a sense pleased him when Frieda, who had settled on his knee as soon as the assistants were gone, said ; f_~f_~ What's your objection to the assistants, darling We don't need to have any mysteries before them. The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. It's difficult to speak of it even before   you, K., and when you Vc heard it all it's possiblef_" isn't it f_" that you'll go away and not want to have anything more to do with us, however little it may seem to concern you. 
One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. 

Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. But Frieda means something to me, I have trusted her completely and want to go on trusting her, and it surprises me that you go out of your way, while discussing Amalia, to attack Frieda and try to shake my confidence in her. 

For let me point out that theref_Ts always something f_" I donf_Tt know what it is f_" that hinders you from seeing clearly how much Barnabas has f_" I'll not say achieved f_" but has had bestowed on him. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. It was through me that the landlady had become your enemy, a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under- value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought, that you had to fight for your post, that you were at a disadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you had to humble yourself before the teacher and were de- livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for my sake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. You were betraying that woman even before you had won her. Then shall remain good friends in spite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihout your friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lo spend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting, only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot be postponed, could have justified that." K. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. They are true friends." f_o Oh, true friends," said K., f_~f_~ they keep spying on me the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable." " I believe I know what you mean," she said, and she clung to his neck and tried to say something else but could not go on speaking, and since their chair was ^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my own position was still insecure f_" how insecure it was, I did not even realise f_" and I was already talking to the ^ landlord about Henriette and Emilie. But I don't want to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get you as far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before it reaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decide that. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. 
So^although his hopes were now rising to an official uniform I had to alter his trousers, and in two hours, so that they would have some resemblance at least to the close-fitting trews of the official uniform, and he might appear in them before you, knowing, of course, that on this point you could be easily taken in. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. IVoin the questions you will at least indirectly learn something of what is in the protocol and through your answers you will be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.f__ f__I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,f__ K. There was nothing else that could be imagined that could have brought Frieda to give up her situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like a spider in its web, with all the threads under her control, threads of which no one knew but she ; it would have been quite impossible to winkle her out against her will, only love for some lowly person, that is to say, something that was not in keeping with her position, could drive her from her place. As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. He would then seemingly abandon the door, so to speak allowing it to exhaust its own taciturnity, turned his attention to other doors, after a while returned, called the other servant, all this ostentatiously and noisily, and began piling up files on the threshold of the shut door, as though he had changed his mind, and as though there were no justification for raking anything away from this gentleman, but, on the contrary, something to be allotted to him. Hereupon a great muttering began in the other rooms, which seemed to indicate approval, the gentleman seemed to be doing something that all would have liked to do long ago and only for some unknown reason had had to leave undone. When I saw you for the first time in the bar f_" when you came in arm-in-arm with Olga f_" well, I knew something about you, bi^t I was quite indifferent to you. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. The voices were muffled, only a word here and there could be indistinctly made out, it did not seem to be conversation either, probably someone was only dictating something ot reading something aloud ; and precisely from the rooms where there was a clinking of glasses and plates no word was to be heard, and the hammering reminded K. The passage itself was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, who was sitting before one of the doors. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. 
And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. Go back to your girls ; they sit beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you they spit at him. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. 
When Frieda gave it away it wasnf_Tt out of mischief but as a warning, to let the parish know that something had happened which everybody should be careful to keep clear of. 

" \ou*re going a little too far, my good " fellow, and I'E have something to say to-morrow abotit your conduct. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. Here it was doubtless fatigue amid happy work, something that outwardly looked like fatigue and was actually indestructible repose, indestruct- ible peace. Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. In everybody that wanders about in the street " I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying to justify himself before this still invisible personage. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. IVoin the questions you will at least indirectly learn something of what is in the protocol and through your answers you will be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.f__ f__I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,f__ K. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. And something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; It would be even more if you came to see us more often. So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. 

Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. 

Had never before heard on a telephone. A man came cleaving his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed before K. If Pepi said something to a guest, she said it openly, the next table could hear it too. All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. That it was too late to present myself at the Castle I knew very well before you saw fit to inform me. Go back to your girls ; they sit beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you they spit at him. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. 


Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had never noticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn't be placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in the habit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^ it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly out of their mouths before they were forgotten, only of course people were always ready to be taken in again next time. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. 
All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. In everybody that wanders about in the street " I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying to justify himself before this still invisible personage. I met her for the first time the night before last, she used to be a chambermaid. Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. So I always find something or other to say to him, such as ' What are you really   ^ aiming at, Barnabas What kind of career, wha ambition arc you dreaming of? One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. In everybody that wanders about in the street " I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying to justify himself before this still invisible personage. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. Now he at least felt strong enough to go before Erlanger. Even Pepi was touched, not even she could remain quite unmoved, even though her attention was actually focussed on something else. Over to the table, showed him the paw, and before he could get a   proper look at it, gave him a whack with the tawse over the back of his hand ; the tails of the tawse were blunted, it was true, but, this time witliout any regard for the cat, she had brought them down so sharply that they raised bloody weals. Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. Go back to your girls ; they sit beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you they spit at him. 
" Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. 


But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. When I saw you for the first time in the bar f_" when you came in arm-in-arm with Olga f_" well, I knew something about you, bi^t I was quite indifferent to you. F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. And something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; It would be even more if you came to see us more often. Said, ** why I mean something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my own. To Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com- manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he   wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. But f_" not to speak of anything else   f_"you were torn away from Klamm, I can't calculate how much that must have meant, but a vague idea of it Ive managed to arrive at gradually, you stumbled, you couldn't find yourself, and ^ven if I was always ready to help you, still I wasn't always there, and when I was there you were held captive by your dreams or by something more palpable, the landlady, sayf_" in short there were times when you^ turned away from me, longed, poor^ child, for vague inexpressible things, and at those periods any passable man had only to come within your range of vision and you lost yourself to him. Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. " Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. In everybody that wanders about in the street " I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying to justify himself before this still invisible personage. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Are these two men here " They reported themselves, but before they could step forward Jeremiah slipped in with a I'm a waiter here," and, greeted by Momus with a smiling slap on the shoulder, disappeared inside. The voices were muffled, only a word here and there could be indistinctly made out, it did not seem to be conversation either, probably someone was only dictating something ot reading something aloud ; and precisely from the rooms where there was a clinking of glasses and plates no word was to be heard, and the hammering reminded K. A janitorf_Ts family that loll in their beds far into the fore- noon Faugh I f__ Well, something might be said about that, particularly as far as the family and the beds were concerned, thought K., while with Frieda's helpf_" the assistants were of no use, lying on the floor they looked in amazement at the lady teacher and the childrenf_" he dragged across the parallel bars And the vaulting horse, threw the blanket over them, and so constructed a little room in which one could at least get on one's clothes protected from the childrenf_Ts gaze. Over to the table, showed him the paw, and before he could get a   proper look at it, gave him a whack with the tawse over the back of his hand ; the tails of the tawse were blunted, it was true, but, this time witliout any regard for the cat, she had brought them down so sharply that they raised bloody weals. 

Followed the hint, for he was shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a little table f_" which must have been specially set out, for usually the customers put up with upturned barrels f_" the young gentleman, and standing before him f_" an unwelcome sight for K. Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. If Pepi said something to a guest, she said it openly, the next table could hear it too. All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. 
They are true friends." f_o Oh, true friends," said K., f_~f_~ they keep spying on me the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable." " I believe I know what you mean," she said, and she clung to his neck and tried to say something else but could not go on speaking, and since their chair was ^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. Not one of them stayed for any length of time, and our best friends were the quickest to go. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. When I saw you for the first time in the bar f_" when you came in arm-in-arm with Olga f_" well, I knew something about you, bi^t I was quite indifferent to you. Had never before heard Amalia utter so many consecutive sentences, and they sounded differently from her usual comments, they had a kind of dignity which obviously impressed not only K. " No, Amalia made that for him long before he became a messenger. Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. As soon as he had gone f_" before opening the door he had leaned his shoulder against it for a moment and embraced the room generally in a final glance f_" K. In appearance good, childish, merry, irre- sponsible youths, fallen from the sky, from the Castle, a dash of childhood's memories with them too ; all that of course must have seemed very nice, especially when I was the antithesis of it all, and was always running after affairs moreover which were scarcely compre- hensible, which were exasperating to you, and which threw me together with people whom you considered deserving of your hate f_" something of which you carried over to me too, in spite of all my innocence. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. Then when the worst was past and father was able again to struggle cautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him on each side, Amalia withdrew into the background again and left him to us."   Olga's Plans *' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupation for father that he was still fit for, something that at least would make him believe that he was helping to remove the burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of the kind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact would have been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch's garden, but \ found something that actually gave me a little hope. My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. The landlady doesn't claim to know what you want from Klamm, she merely maintains that before you knew me you strove as eagerly to reach Klamm as you have done since. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. It was through me that the landlady had become your enemy, a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under- value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought, that you had to fight for your post, that you were at a disadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you had to humble yourself before the teacher and were de- livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for my sake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. Yet Olga repaired her blunder when she con- tinued : f_o However, whenever I think I could cast aside all my worries, for you w'ould find the explanation for everything and the way out, you suddenly say something entirely, something painfully, wrong, such as for instance this ; that Amalia knows more than anyone else, does not interfere and is most to blame. Surely you donf_Tt want me to undertake something and, as a consequence of insufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances and for that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage you and myself in a way that is beyond repair.f__ f__ No, K.,f__ Olga said after a pause, f__ I donf_Tt want that and there- fore it would be better if everything could be left as it was,f__ f__ I donf_Tt think,f__ K. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. I am here to fight, certainly, but I don't want to be attacked before my arrival. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. A little time went by before she looked up, passed her hand over her eyes, and said : " This wrap was given me by Klamm. Klamm gives nothing of himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about there, one can get it out of him.f__ f_> K. Being here in the warmth was something to be thankful for and one had to take precautions against being driven out. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. '' I certainly had no doubts about yoi and if I have acquired something of the kind from tl landlady, I'll be only too glad to throw it off and be you for forgiveness on my knees, as I do, believe m all the time, even when I'm saying such horrible thing But the truth remains that you keep man^ things fro: me ; you come and go, I don't know where or fro: where. Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is something he's pretty good at. Had never before heard on a telephone. A man came cleaving his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed before K. F_~f_~ Yesterday, I think, you had the impudence to say something about my dress.'" K. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. Well, so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day, shortly before lunch-time. Perhaps that was all it was, but perhaps it was something quite different. All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. 
Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. A little time went by before she looked up, passed her hand over her eyes, and said : " This wrap was given me by Klamm. But barren of results as all this time was in other ways, it had a good effect on Barnabas, if one can call it a good thing that he grew prematurely old, became a man before his time, yes, even in some ways more grave and sensible than most men. " Look what Klamm has written " said K., holding the letter before his face. 
And then immediately, before there was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of communication, had come about, of which for the present only K. Hasn't Frieda told you anything about us " " Mere hints," said K., " nothing definite, but the very mention of your name exasperates her." " And has the landlady told you nothing either " " No, nothing." " Nor any- body else " " Nobody." " Of course ; how could anybody tell you anything Everyone knows something about us, either the truth, so far as it is accessible, or at least some exaggerated rumour, mostly invention, and everybody thinks about us more than need be, but nobody will actually speak about it, people are shy of putting these things into words. It's difficult to speak of it even before   you, K., and when you Vc heard it all it's possiblef_" isn't it f_" that you'll go away and not want to have anything more to do with us, however little it may seem to concern you. 
I do not know whether it is like this, and my own guilt is by no means clear to me, only when I compare myself with you something of this kind dawns on me : it is as if we had both striven too intensely, too noisily, too childishly, with too little experience, to get some- thing that for instance with Frieda's calm and Frieda's matter-of-factness can be got easily and without much ado. Perhaps that was all it was, but perhaps it was something quite different. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. I replied, drawing on Mizzi's splendid memory, that the first suggestion had come from the chancellory itself (but that it had come from a different department we had of course forgotten long before this). If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. " Yes," the gentle- mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. Well, so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day, shortly before lunch-time. Perhaps that was all it was, but perhaps it was something quite different. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. What- ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." Petitions " And what did we do meanwhile The worst thing we could have done, something much more deserving of contempt than our original offence f_" we betrayed Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- ness. Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. Then when the worst was past and father was able again to struggle cautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him on each side, Amalia withdrew into the background again and left him to us."   Olga's Plans *' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupation for father that he was still fit for, something that at least would make him believe that he was helping to remove the burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of the kind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact would have been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch's garden, but \ found something that actually gave me a little hope. But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. Almost allowed himself to be seduced by it again into believing Barnabas f_" " I'll certiinly see to it, and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me last time as well." " What " cried K., " haven't you seen to that yet then  Weren't you at the Castle next ay " " No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seen him yourself, and there happened to be a great deal of work just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be going to the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinking of, you incomprehensible fellow  " cried K., beating his brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs come before everything else, then You're in an important position, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me in this wretched manner What does your father's work matter  Klamm is waiting for this information, and instead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him, you prefer to clean the stable " " My father is a cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had orders from Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant." " Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. " Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. F_o How have you come to be so dependent on her Were things like that before the catastrophe Or did it*happen later And do you never feel that you want to be independent of her And is there any sense in your dependence Shef_Ts the youngest, and should give way to you. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. Now all that was sufficient cause for you to become my lover for one night, but something more was needed to turn it into a more serious affair. And that something more was Klamm. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. 


Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. A man came cleaving his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed before K. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. 
This babel of voices in the rooms had something extremely merry about it. I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. " Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. How startled I was f_" but that was only a superficial fear without   deeper causef_" when you said to-day that before you knew me you had gone about here in a blind circle. F_o Because you think I can do something for you with Erlanger.f__ *   Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I have in you otherwise " K. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. 
Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. " Look what Klamm has written " said K., holding the letter before his face. And finally, as we might have foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of the Fire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me, Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop from weakness in the lungs, a serious man who never could laugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired, whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputy Captain, and to whom he had now to say that the Brigade required his services no longer and asked for the return of his diploma. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. 
Ei;lflnger had already arrived, but he was consulting first with Momus before he admitted his clients. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. 
He would then seemingly abandon the door, so to speak allowing it to exhaust its own taciturnity, turned his attention to other doors, after a while returned, called the other servant, all this ostentatiously and noisily, and began piling up files on the threshold of the shut door, as though he had changed his mind, and as though there were no justification for raking anything away from this gentleman, but, on the contrary, something to be allotted to him. Hereupon a great muttering began in the other rooms, which seemed to indicate approval, the gentleman seemed to be doing something that all would have liked to do long ago and only for some unknown reason had had to leave undone. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. But Frieda means something to me, I have trusted her completely and want to go on trusting her, and it surprises me that you go out of your way, while discussing Amalia, to attack Frieda and try to shake my confidence in her. 
So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. Go back to your girls ; they sit beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you they spit at him. She saw me through the window as I was coming for beer, and ran to the door and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for a long time and promise her the ribbon from my hair before she would let me in. Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had never noticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn't be placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in the habit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^ it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly out of their mouths before they were forgotten, only of course people were always ready to be taken in again next time. But I don't want to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get you as far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before it reaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decide that. Now all that was sufficient cause for you to become my lover for one night, but something more was needed to turn it into a more serious affair. 
Are these two men here " They reported themselves, but before they could step forward Jeremiah slipped in with a I'm a waiter here," and, greeted by Momus with a smiling slap on the shoulder, disappeared inside. 
But Frieda means something to me, I have trusted her completely and want to go on trusting her, and it surprises me that you go out of your way, while discussing Amalia, to attack Frieda and try to shake my confidence in her. Had carried out the pail with the dirty water, fetched fresh water, and was beginning to turn out the classroom, a boy of about twelve stepped out from his desk, touched K.'s hand, and said something which was quite lost in the general uproar. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. Had never before heard on a telephone. To Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com- manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he   wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. " If you've been asked to come you're probably needed, that's an exceptional case, but we small people stick to our tradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no," said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybody here." And taking them all by surprise he made an adroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. " Yes," the gentle- mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. For let me point out that theref_Ts always something f_" I donf_Tt know what it is f_" that hinders you from seeing clearly how much Barnabas has f_" I'll not say achieved f_" but has had bestowed on him. And when I'm lying beside you at night I can't sleep and must always be leaning across you to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleep in the blanket and the other kneeling before the stove door putting in wood, and I have to bend forward so far that I nearly waken you. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. I replied, drawing on Mizzi's splendid memory, that the first suggestion had come from the chancellory itself (but that it had come from a different department we had of course forgotten long before this). " Did you not mention once before a Control Authority From your description the whole economy is one that would rouse one's apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." ' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would still be nothing compared with the strictness which the Authority imposes on itself. Yet before he could be forgiven he had to prove his guilt, and that was denied in all the bureaux. Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. And then immediately, before there was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of communication, had come about, of which for the present only K. Nor did he need them any more ; by the marriage he was gaining another, better kind of security f_" member of the community f_" rights and duties f_" no longer a stranger f_" , then he only needed to beware of the complacency of all these people, an easy matter with the Castle before his eyes. " Because it's my whim." replied the teacher,   and now I repeat for the last time, get out But as that too had no effect the teacher went over to the table and consulted in a whisper with Fraulein Gisa ; she said something about the police, but the teacher rejected it, finally they seemed in agreement, the teacher ordered the children to go into his classroom, they would be taught there along with the other children. 
When Frieda gave it away it wasnf_Tt out of mischief but as a warning, to let the parish know that something had happened which everybody should be careful to keep clear of. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. 
When Frieda gave it away it wasnf_Tt out of mischief but as a warning, to let the parish know that something had happened which everybody should be careful to keep clear of. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. I bowed before her triumph and I felt that everyone must bow before her, perhaps what amazed us so much was the difference in her appearance, for she wasn't really beautiful, but her sombre glance, and it has kept the same quality since that day, was high over ourlieads and involuntarily one had almost literally to bow before her. But her admonition was in vain, for her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. Yet this is something scarcely anjf_Tone will do, it is almost senseless. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. Had never before heard Amalia utter so many consecutive sentences, and they sounded differently from her usual comments, they had a kind of dignity which obviously impressed not only K. If you delay much longer Erlanger will be down on me, and that is something I should very much like to avoid. Here it was doubtless fatigue amid happy work, something that outwardly looked like fatigue and was actually indestructible repose, indestruct- ible peace. But her admonition was in vain, for her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. 

" He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Besides, before I'm married theref_Ts something I must do. 
F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. 

Here it was doubtless fatigue amid happy work, something that outwardly looked like fatigue and was actually indestructible repose, indestruct- ible peace. 
Many a one before now has lost the game because, thinking he was not making progress with the competent authority, he tried to slip through by approaching some other, one not competent. Burgel's quiet, self-satisfied voice, which was obviously doing its best to put its owner to sleep, was something he had now become so used to that it would do more to put him to sleep than to disturb him. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. As soon as he had gone f_" before opening the door he had leaned his shoulder against it for a moment and embraced the room generally in a final glance f_" K. The landlady doesn't claim to know what you want from Klamm, she merely maintains that before you knew me you strove as eagerly to reach Klamm as you have done since. The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. Long before this K. 

Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. 
Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. But her admonition was in vain, for her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Ever seen it lijce that either before oi since f_" he had succeeded in climbing it with astonishing ease ; at a place where he had already slipped down many a time he had clambered with a small flag between his teeth right to the top at the first attempt. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. Surely you donf_Tt want me to undertake something and, as a consequence of insufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances and for that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage you and myself in a way that is beyond repair.f__ f__ No, K.,f__ Olga said after a pause, f__ I donf_Tt want that and there- fore it would be better if everything could be left as it was,f__ f__ I donf_Tt think,f__ K. So something must have changed on your side, through the of strangers or in some way or other. And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. 
But barren of results as all this time was in other ways, it had a good effect on Barnabas, if one can call it a good thing that he grew prematurely old, became a man before his time, yes, even in some ways more grave and sensible than most men. 
F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. 
Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. " Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. If he had been planted sqjiarely before his desk K. 

So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. To distract Frieda's mind a little, and he begged her to bring him something to eat for he had had nothing since midday. In appearance good, childish, merry, irre- sponsible youths, fallen from the sky, from the Castle, a dash of childhood's memories with them too ; all that of course must have seemed very nice, especially when I was the antithesis of it all, and was always running after affairs moreover which were scarcely compre- hensible, which were exasperating to you, and which threw me together with people whom you considered deserving of your hate f_" something of which you carried over to me too, in spite of all my innocence. I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. 

He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. There's a great official in the Castle called Sortini." " I've heard of him already," said K., " he had something to do with bring- ing me here." " I don't think so," said Olga, " Sortini 'hardly ever comes into the open. 
So I have been told by the landlady, from whom I have all this, :she said she must open my eyes for me about various things before I marry. Almost allowed himself to be seduced by it again into believing Barnabas f_" " I'll certiinly see to it, and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me last time as well." " What " cried K., " haven't you seen to that yet then  Weren't you at the Castle next ay " " No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seen him yourself, and there happened to be a great deal of work just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be going to the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinking of, you incomprehensible fellow  " cried K., beating his brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs come before everything else, then You're in an important position, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me in this wretched manner What does your father's work matter  Klamm is waiting for this information, and instead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him, you prefer to clean the stable " " My father is a cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had orders from Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant." " Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. 

Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. What special things had he in mind Was he going to achieve something special A good appointment, a distinction Was he after something of that sort Well, then he ought to have set about things differently from the very beginning. Yet this is something scarcely anjf_Tone will do, it is almost senseless. So^although his hopes were now rising to an official uniform I had to alter his trousers, and in two hours, so that they would have some resemblance at least to the close-fitting trews of the official uniform, and he might appear in them before you, knowing, of course, that on this point you could be easily taken in. Now up in the Castle we must rest content with whatever our lot z&o  happens to be, but down here we can, it may be, do something ourselves, tl^at is, make sure of your good-will, or at least save ourselves from your dislike, or, what's more important, protect you as far as our strength and experience go, so that your connection with the Castlef_" by which we might perhaps be helped too f_" might not be lost. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. But she lost prestige with people, that, of course, she could not fail to notice, indeed she usually noticed things even before they existed. And so she saw how people were becoming indiflerent, Friedaf_Ts appearance on the scene was no longer anything that made it worth anyonef_Ts while even to glance up, not even the men-servants bothered about her any more, they had enough sense to stick to Olga and girls of that sort, from the landlordf_Ts behaviour, too, she noticed that she was becoming less and less indispensable, one could not go on for ever inventing new stories about Klamm, everything has its limits, and so dear Frieda decided to try something new. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. I am here to fight, certainly, but I don't want to be attacked before my arrival. Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. 

Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. He would then seemingly abandon the door, so to speak allowing it to exhaust its own taciturnity, turned his attention to other doors, after a while returned, called the other servant, all this ostentatiously and noisily, and began piling up files on the threshold of the shut door, as though he had changed his mind, and as though there were no justification for raking anything away from this gentleman, but, on the contrary, something to be allotted to him. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. But her admonition was in vain, for her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. And then immediately, before there was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of communication, had come about, of which for the present only K. Nor did he need them any more ; by the marriage he was gaining another, better kind of security f_" member of the community f_" rights and duties f_" no longer a stranger f_" , then he only needed to beware of the complacency of all these people, an easy matter with the Castle before his eyes. 
When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. Here, too, her girl friends helped our as best they could, but they could not do much. " If you've been asked to come you're probably needed, that's an exceptional case, but we small people stick to our tradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no," said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybody here." And taking them all by surprise he made an adroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. 

As soon as her eye met K.f_Ts it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning hjm- self, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. Then shall remain good friends in spite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihout your friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lo spend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting, only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot be postponed, could have justified that." K. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. 
I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. 

The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. 
Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Ever seen it lijce that either before oi since f_" he had succeeded in climbing it with astonishing ease ; at a place where he had already slipped down many a time he had clambered with a small flag between his teeth right to the top at the first attempt. All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. He would then seemingly abandon the door, so to speak allowing it to exhaust its own taciturnity, turned his attention to other doors, after a while returned, called the other servant, all this ostentatiously and noisily, and began piling up files on the threshold of the shut door, as though he had changed his mind, and as though there were no justification for raking anything away from this gentleman, but, on the contrary, something to be allotted to him. 
And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. Said, ** why I mean something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my own. 
And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. 
Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. Do you call it reverence that leads Barnabas to abuse the privilege of admission to that room by spending his time there doing nothing, or makes him when he comes down again belittle and d^espise the men before whom he has just been trembling, or allows him because he's depressed or weary to put off delivering letters and fail in executing commissions entrusted to him That's far from being reverence. So official appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh everything carefully. Now up in the Castle we must rest content with whatever our lot z&o  happens to be, but down here we can, it may be, do something ourselves, tl^at is, make sure of your good-will, or at least save ourselves from your dislike, or, what's more important, protect you as far as our strength and experience go, so that your connection with the Castlef_" by which we might perhaps be helped too f_" might not be lost. The men had finished with the tubf_" in w'liich the children were now wallowing in charge of the fair-haired woman f_" and were standing fully dressed before K. Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. Go back to your girls ; they sit beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you they spit at him. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. I am here to fight, certainly, but I don't want to be attacked before my arrival. Well, what happened before I came " " The whole village knows of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, people from the village may have heard it, so it got around perhaps. " If you've been asked to come you're probably needed, that's an exceptional case, but we small people stick to our tradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no," said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybody here." And taking them all by surprise he made an adroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. Answered : f_~f_~I know, but I don't want you to wait here." It annoyed him, however, and yet in a sense pleased him when Frieda, who had settled on his knee as soon as the assistants were gone, said ; f_~f_~ What's your objection to the assistants, darling We don't need to have any mysteries before them. Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had never noticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn't be placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in the habit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^ it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly out of their mouths before they were forgotten, only of course people were always ready to be taken in again next time. 
Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. 
Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. IVoin the questions you will at least indirectly learn something of what is in the protocol and through your answers you will be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.f__ f__I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,f__ K. 

Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. A janitorf_Ts family that loll in their beds far into the fore- noon Faugh I f__ Well, something might be said about that, particularly as far as the family and the beds were concerned, thought K., while with Frieda's helpf_" the assistants were of no use, lying on the floor they looked in amazement at the lady teacher and the childrenf_" he dragged across the parallel bars And the vaulting horse, threw the blanket over them, and so constructed a little room in which one could at least get on one's clothes protected from the childrenf_Ts gaze. And there she whispered something so low that K. A janitorf_Ts family that loll in their beds far into the fore- noon Faugh I f__ Well, something might be said about that, particularly as far as the family and the beds were concerned, thought K., while with Frieda's helpf_" the assistants were of no use, lying on the floor they looked in amazement at the lady teacher and the childrenf_" he dragged across the parallel bars And the vaulting horse, threw the blanket over them, and so constructed a little room in which one could at least get on one's clothes protected from the childrenf_Ts gaze. Taking a long breath, she wiped a lew tears from her eyes and cheeks and then looWd at K.,   nodding, as if meaning to say that at bottom what mattered was not her misfortune at all, she would bear it all right, for that she needed neither help nor comfort from anyone at all, and least of all from K., even though she was so young she knew something about life, and her misfortune was only a confirmation of what she knew already, but what mattered was K., she had wanted to show him what he himseff was like, even after the collapse of all her hopes she had thought it necessary to do that. I do not know whether it is like this, and my own guilt is by no means clear to me, only when I compare myself with you something of this kind dawns on me : it is as if we had both striven too intensely, too noisily, too childishly, with too little experience, to get some- thing that for instance with Frieda's calm and Frieda's matter-of-factness can be got easily and without much ado. There was nothing else that could be imagined that could have brought Frieda to give up her situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like a spider in its web, with all the threads under her control, threads of which no one knew but she ; it would have been quite impossible to winkle her out against her will, only love for some lowly person, that is to say, something that was not in keeping with her position, could drive her from her place. For let me point out that theref_Ts always something f_" I donf_Tt know what it is f_" that hinders you from seeing clearly how much Barnabas has f_" I'll not say achieved f_" but has had bestowed on him. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run after his customers and force them to come back But, father would object f_" ^we always discussed the whole interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we were doing, but paid no attention f_" well, father would object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he could easily make up again for all he had lost, that didn't matter if only he were forgiven. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. Coming and who had instantly issued the necessary orders so that even the driver was informed that the departure could not take place before K. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. 
As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. At last they stopped before a door which was not in any way different from the others, and yet behind which, so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleep away all his stay in the village, and then when he woke to have to leave again immediately for the Castle. As soon as he had gone f_" before opening the door he had leaned his shoulder against it for a moment and embraced the room generally in a final glance f_" K. 

Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. 

Well, so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day, shortly before lunch-time. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. 
What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. 

Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. Klamm gives nothing of himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about there, one can get it out of him.f__ f_> K. 
How revolting all that had been, and all the more revolting because this impression could not be explained by derails^, for though one listed the details in order to have something to hold on to, they were not bad, it was something else about it all that one could not put a name to. What is held against you is obviously nothing but the fact that you are aiming higher than others ; the fact that Barnabas has beco'h^e a Castle messenger* or is trying to become one* is something for which people bear you a grudge ; in order to avoid having to admire you, they despise you, and they do it with such intensity that even you yourselves are defeated by it. Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. Taking a long breath, she wiped a lew tears from her eyes and cheeks and then looWd at K.,   nodding, as if meaning to say that at bottom what mattered was not her misfortune at all, she would bear it all right, for that she needed neither help nor comfort from anyone at all, and least of all from K., even though she was so young she knew something about life, and her misfortune was only a confirmation of what she knew already, but what mattered was K., she had wanted to show him what he himseff was like, even after the collapse of all her hopes she had thought it necessary to do that. 
Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. Followed the hint, for he was shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a little table f_" which must have been specially set out, for usually the customers put up with upturned barrels f_" the young gentleman, and standing before him f_" an unwelcome sight for K. But I don't want to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get you as far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before it reaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decide that. And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. They are true friends." f_o Oh, true friends," said K., f_~f_~ they keep spying on me the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable." " I believe I know what you mean," she said, and she clung to his neck and tried to say something else but could not go on speaking, and since their chair was ^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. F_o Since Frieda puts such confidence in you," cried K., f_o I must do the same, and since not long ago Frieda called my assistants true friends we are all friends together. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. 
A man came cleaving his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed before K. 
All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. Being here in the warmth was something to be thankful for and one had to take precautions against being driven out. The landlord and his wife were still standing before him as though even now he still constituted a certain menace, as^ chough in view of his utter unreliability it were not quite impossible that he might here suddenly start up and try to invade the passage once again. If Pepi said something to a guest, she said it openly, the next table could hear it too. Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is something he's pretty good at. And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. Well, so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day, shortly before lunch-time. 
Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. Now fromrthis foolproofness it does result that everyone who has any petition or who must be interrogated in any matter for other reasons, instantly, without delay, usually indeed even before he has worked the matter out for himself, more, indeed, even before he himself knows of it, lias  ? Yet this is something scarcely anjf_Tone will do, it is almost senseless. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. She saw me through the window as I was coming for beer, and ran to the door and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for a long time and promise her the ribbon from my hair before she would let me in. And that something more was Klamm. And so she saw how people were becoming indiflerent, Friedaf_Ts appearance on the scene was no longer anything that made it worth anyonef_Ts while even to glance up, not even the men-servants bothered about her any more, they had enough sense to stick to Olga and girls of that sort, from the landlordf_Ts behaviour, too, she noticed that she was becoming less and less indispensable, one could not go on for ever inventing new stories about Klamm, everything has its limits, and so dear Frieda decided to try something new. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. Of course Barnabas has time enough to observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big room for hours and days at a time before Klamm happens to see him. As soon as her eye met K.f_Ts it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning hjm- self, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. At a desk in the middle of the room   in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his face brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung low before him. " Look what Klamm has written " said K., holding the letter before his face. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. Fought for something vitally near to him, for himself, and moreover, at least at the very beginning, on his own ^initiative, for he was the attacker ; and besides he fought not only for himself, but clearly for other powers as well which he did not know, but in which, without infringing the regulations of the authorities, he was permitted to believe. Of course my father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under the engine if there was something there he had to show us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. Fought for something vitally near to him, for himself, and moreover, at least at the very beginning, on his own ^initiative, for he was the attacker ; and besides he fought not only for himself, but clearly for other powers as well which he did not know, but in which, without infringing the regulations of the authorities, he was permitted to believe. I was jealous, and cried half the night before the celebration. 

Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. " Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that the woman had now returned with the candle and was kneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn't I help your wife to look for it " The Superintendent smilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don't want to make any parade of official secrecy before you, but to let you look through these papers yourself f_" no, I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room, only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; it looked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super- intendent were dozing. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. 
And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is something he's pretty good at. So I have been told by the landlady, from whom I have all this, :she said she must open my eyes for me about various things before I marry. When an ail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it may happen, even before the matter has been fully con- sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes in some unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be found any longer later on, a decision that settles the matter, if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. Had forgotten himself while he was speaking, it was as if he were standing before Klamm's door talking to the porter. Did his best to find every- thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating his message word for word, not however as he had given it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before Klamm. 
And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. If I keep ant thing from you, it is only from fear of you, and this fear is something I do not hide from you, but show quire openly. Why did you come Were you really the great man foj* whom we had taken you, if you cared to come into our poor parlour Why did you not stay in your own place, waiting for the messenger to come up to you, as it became your dignity, sending him away instantly Did you not take away something of the importance of Barnabasf_Ts appointment as a messenger, by the fact that you had come Besides, though you were foreign in )^our dress, you were poorly dressed, and sadly I turned this way and that the wet coat that I took off you that time. " Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that the woman had now returned with the candle and was kneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn't I help your wife to look for it " The Superintendent smilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don't want to make any parade of official secrecy before you, but to let you look through these papers yourself f_" no, I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room, only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; it looked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super- intendent were dozing. She saw me through the window as I was coming for beer, and ran to the door and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for a long time and promise her the ribbon from my hair before she would let me in. Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had never noticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn't be placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in the habit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^ it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly out of their mouths before they were forgotten, only of course people were always ready to be taken in again next time. 
The officials preferred indeed to get through their business in the taproom or in their rooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bed before retiring for the night, or in the morning when they were too weary to get up and wanted to stretch themselves for a little longer. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. 
She saw me through the window as I was coming for beer, and ran to the door and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for a long time and promise her the ribbon from my hair before she would let me in. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. Thar is something I should have liked to read, for I always like to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like causing annoyance.f__ f__ And I like playing the innocent,f__ the landlady said. 
Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. Followed the hint, for he was shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a little table f_" which must have been specially set out, for usually the customers put up with upturned barrels f_" the young gentleman, and standing before him f_" an unwelcome sight for K. 
" If you've been asked to come you're probably needed, that's an exceptional case, but we small people stick to our tradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no," said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybody here." And taking them all by surprise he made an adroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. I was jealous, and cried half the night before the celebration. Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my own position was still insecure f_" how insecure it was, I did not even realise f_" and I was already talking to the ^ landlord about Henriette and Emilie. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. Nor did he need them any more ; by the marriage he was gaining another, better kind of security f_" member of the community f_" rights and duties f_" no longer a stranger f_" , then he only needed to beware of the complacency of all these people, an easy matter with the Castle before his eyes. And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. What importance, for example, had the power, merely formal up till now, which Klamm exercised over K.'s services, compared with the very real power which Klamm possessed in K.f_Ts bedroom So it came about that while a light and frivolous bearing, a certain deliberate lessness was sufficient when one came in direct contact with the authorities, one needed in everything else the greatest caution, and had to look round on every side before one made a single step. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. I was jealous, and cried half the night before the celebration. I bowed before her triumph and I felt that everyone must bow before her, perhaps what amazed us so much was the difference in her appearance, for she wasn't really beautiful, but her sombre glance, and it has kept the same quality since that day, was high over ourlieads and involuntarily one had almost literally to bow before her. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. One of them in passing said casually in apology, with an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of the others' faces : " There's always something new to listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat and drink to him. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. From the school, and this not before his mother knew of it and gave permission. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. A man came cleaving his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed before K. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. Even Pepi was touched, not even she could remain quite unmoved, even though her attention was actually focussed on something else. When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. But I don't want to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get you as far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before it reaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decide that. Still, they were coming to meet him, evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which delivered him from the darkness roaring round him were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he had expected something else, not those old acquaint-   ances who were such a burden to him. Someone who rode rough- shod over everything, both over the law and over the most ordinary human consideration, with this callous indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not care that he was making the distribution of the files almost impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and who brought about something that had never happened before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this person on whom nothing else could make any impression They, the gentlemen, calling for help Would not the landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come   dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and flien disappear again at once Quivering with indigna- tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. Being here in the warmth was something to be thankful for and one had to take precautions against being driven out. This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait in common with the real one, the resemblance may not exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts have no significance whatever he has at least been set there by somebody for some purpose. F_o Since Frieda puts such confidence in you," cried K., f_o I must do the same, and since not long ago Frieda called my assistants true friends we are all friends together. " She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. Here before your eyes I snap this switch which was intended for you, for it wasnf_Tt for fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so as to surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a few times. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. Hereupon a great muttering began in the other rooms, which seemed to indicate approval, the gentleman seemed to be doing something that all would have liked to do long ago and only for some unknown reason had had to leave undone. That was something they simply could not face. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. Yet this is something scarcely anjf_Tone will do, it is almost senseless. Many a one before now has lost the game because, thinking he was not making progress with the competent authority, he tried to slip through by approaching some other, one not competent. " Yes," the gentle- mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. 

What- ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." Petitions " And what did we do meanwhile The worst thing we could have done, something much more deserving of contempt than our original offence f_" we betrayed Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- ness. 
Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. 
And so it came about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. " Because it's my whim." replied the teacher,   and now I repeat for the last time, get out But as that too had no effect the teacher went over to the table and consulted in a whisper with Fraulein Gisa ; she said something about the police, but the teacher rejected it, finally they seemed in agreement, the teacher ordered the children to go into his classroom, they would be taught there along with the other children. 
And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. But apart from that Klamm is also the root cause of your illness, for before your marriage your heart was already worn out with your hopeless passion for him. It was through me that the landlady had become your enemy, a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under- value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought, that you had to fight for your post, that you were at a disadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you had to humble yourself before the teacher and were de- livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for my sake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. 
And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. As she had never loved anyone before ; month after month she had been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend   her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now suddenly K. 
And in her eyes it exalted what he had done still more that it should have been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the way for Pepi f_" Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she must at least have other secrets that nobody could enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. Then deep in thought Hans stared in ftont of him for a little f_" just like a woman who wants to do something forbidden and seeks an opportunity to do it without being punished f_" ^and said that the day after to-morrow it might be possible, his father was going to the Herrenhof in the evening, he had a conference there ; then he, Hans, would come in the evening and take K. Long before this K. My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. So I always find something or other to say to him, such as ' What are you really   ^ aiming at, Barnabas What kind of career, wha ambition arc you dreaming of? Just then Frieda opened one of the windows so as to air the room before putting on the fire, as she had promised K. Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. When I saw you for the first time in the bar f_" when you came in arm-in-arm with Olga f_" well, I knew something about you, bi^t I was quite indifferent to you. All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. Just then Frieda opened one of the windows so as to air the room before putting on the fire, as she had promised K. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. Said, ** why I mean something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my own. 
If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. I didnf_Tt want to talk of this before Frieda. Then shall remain good friends in spite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihout your friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lo spend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting, only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot be postponed, could have justified that." K. Perhaps f_" it would be a bad thing, but it is possible f_" perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when I marry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I am free, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thijA- visit of mine to you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but I am still free, I can still, if something seems to me as important as Barnabasf_Ts affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it as exhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. All that simply means that something is there, something which Barnabas has the chance of using, something or other at the very least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. 
When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. 

That it was too late to present myself at the Castle I knew very well before you saw fit to inform me. ** I havenf_Tt met the Count yet,f__ said K., f__ but he pays well for good work, doesnf_Tt he When a man like me travels so far from home he wants to go back with something in his pockets.f__ f__ 'rheref_Ts no need for the gentleman to worry about that kind of thing ; nobody complains of being badly paid.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., f__ If_Tm not one of your timid people, and can give a piece of my mind even to a Count, but of course itf_Ts much better to have everything settled up without any trouble.f__ I'lic landlord sat opposite K. In a way that was so shrewd and bright-eyed that he was almost disconcerted, it was as chough he had said something wildly mistaken and as though Olga must now begin arguing with him and clearing up the mistakes and as though she were very happy about this task. " I donf_Tt doubt that for a moment, but we were speaking of the time before your marriage, and it must have been an extraordinary thing at that stage for Hansf_Ts family to on the marriage f_" at a money sacrifice, or at least at such a great risk as the handing over of the inn must have been f_" and without trusting in anything but your   powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, and Hans's powers of work, which everybody must have known beforehand were nil." " Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I know what you're getting at and how wide you are of the mark. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. If I should find the official in front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, but that's not my primary object." " Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, "if by using my influence I can manage to get your request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise me to do nothing on your own account until the reply comes back." " I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be to fulfil your wishes or your whims. It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. An official decision is, after all, not just something like, for instance, this medicine bottle, standing here on this little table. At last they stopped before a door which was not in any way different from the others, and yet behind which, so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleep away all his stay in the village, and then when he woke to have to leave again immediately for the Castle. " No, Amalia made that for him long before he became a messenger. 
All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. 
In a way that was so shrewd and bright-eyed that he was almost disconcerted, it was as chough he had said something wildly mistaken and as though Olga must now begin arguing with him and clearing up the mistakes and as though she were very happy about this task. And something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; It would be even more if you came to see us more often. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. 
So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. 
" She's upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. Of course on the other hand one could argue that Schwarzer's attitude was something K. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. 

Yet before he could be forgiven he had to prove his guilt, and that was denied in all the bureaux. Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. You must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must    lose through her association with you." " Of course, guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but theyf_Tll be best given before the notary, and at the same time other officials of the Countf_Ts will perhaps be concerned. Besides, before I'm married theref_Ts something I must do. It was through me that the landlady had become your enemy, a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under- value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought, that you had to fight for your post, that you were at a disadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you had to humble yourself before the teacher and were de- livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for my sake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. You were betraying that woman even before you had won her. 

It was well aired, the stove amply stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the maidsf_T filthy pile of things and even their photographs cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* was covered with a white embroidered cloth. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. Had carried out the pail with the dirty water, fetched fresh water, and was beginning to turn out the classroom, a boy of about twelve stepped out from his desk, touched K.'s hand, and said something which was quite lost in the general uproar. Yes, he even forbade me to light the fires early, because he thought that you had shown by locking the wood- shed that you didn't want them to be put on before you came yourself. What special things had he in mind Was he going to achieve something special A good appointment, a distinction Was he after something of that sort Well, then he ought to have set about things differently from the very beginning. Someone who rode rough- shod over everything, both over the law and over the most ordinary human consideration, with this callous indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not care that he was making the distribution of the files almost impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and who brought about something that had never happened before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this person on whom nothing else could make any impression They, the gentlemen, calling for help Would not the landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come   dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and flien disappear again at once Quivering with indigna- tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. 
And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. Those damned railings in the school garden, they  give me something to think about yet, and then,   already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night afterwards. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. But apart from that Klamm is also the root cause of your illness, for before your marriage your heart was already worn out with your hopeless passion for him. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. 
Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. 

Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. Here before your eyes I snap this switch which was intended for you, for it wasnf_Tt for fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so as to surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a few times. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Then he would stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no sound came from inside the room, and to go in without permission was obviously something the servant had no right to do. Followed the hint, for he was shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a little table f_" which must have been specially set out, for usually the customers put up with upturned barrels f_" the young gentleman, and standing before him f_" an unwelcome sight for K. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. Then when the worst was past and father was able again to struggle cautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him on each side, Amalia withdrew into the background again and left him to us."   Olga's Plans *' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupation for father that he was still fit for, something that at least would make him believe that he was helping to remove the burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of the kind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact would have been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch's garden, but \ found something that actually gave me a little hope. 
When Frieda gave it away it wasnf_Tt out of mischief but as a warning, to let the parish know that something had happened which everybody should be careful to keep clear of. Then deep in thought Hans stared in ftont of him for a little f_" just like a woman who wants to do something forbidden and seeks an opportunity to do it without being punished f_" ^and said that the day after to-morrow it might be possible, his father was going to the Herrenhof in the evening, he had a conference there ; then he, Hans, would come in the evening and take K. My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. There was something imperious in his character, but   it was so mingled with childish innocence that they submitted to it without resistance, half-smilingly, half in earnest. Itm II too, these questions seemed useless, he admitted that the boy was right ; besides there was something humiliating in ferreting out family secrets by taking advantage of a child ; doubly humiliating, however, was the fact that in spite of his effort she had learned nothing. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. How wonderfully it was transformed in drinking out f_~of something which seemed hardly more than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman Can it be " K. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. 
Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. Hereupon a great muttering began in the other rooms, which seemed to indicate approval, the gentleman seemed to be doing something that all would have liked to do long ago and only for some unknown reason had had to leave undone. And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. IVoin the questions you will at least indirectly learn something of what is in the protocol and through your answers you will be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.f__ f__I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,f__ K. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. The woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she seemed to have completely given up looking, in any case the candle was standing quite far away from her. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. In spite of everything that had happened he had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was something gaiifed, which itA-was true he only held now in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the same merely on account of a polite command. Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. 
Then deep in thought Hans stared in ftont of him for a little f_" just like a woman who wants to do something forbidden and seeks an opportunity to do it without being punished f_" ^and said that the day after to-morrow it might be possible, his father was going to the Herrenhof in the evening, he had a conference there ; then he, Hans, would come in the evening and take K. Long before this K. And, besides, we're despised by everybody and you must be influenced by the general opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- ing you And the messages, which I had read before you got them f_" Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- senger he couldn't allow himself to do that f_" seemed at the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they referred you to the Superintendent. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. Pepi saw her the very same morning before she moved out, the staff all came running up, after all, everyone was curious to see the sight. Even Pepi was touched, not even she could remain quite unmoved, even though her attention was actually focussed on something else. The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. How startled I was f_" but that was only a superficial fear without   deeper causef_" when you said to-day that before you knew me you had gone about here in a blind circle. Hasn't Frieda told you anything about us " " Mere hints," said K., " nothing definite, but the very mention of your name exasperates her." " And has the landlady told you nothing either " " No, nothing." " Nor any- body else " " Nobody." " Of course ; how could anybody tell you anything Everyone knows something about us, either the truth, so far as it is accessible, or at least some exaggerated rumour, mostly invention, and everybody thinks about us more than need be, but nobody will actually speak about it, people are shy of putting these things into words. Coming and who had instantly issued the necessary orders so that even the driver was informed that the departure could not take place before K. Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. What special things had he in mind Was he going to achieve something special A good appointment, a distinction Was he after something of that sort Well, then he ought to have set about things differently from the very beginning. 
Oh, you are fine   fellows said K., do you know anything about sur- veying ** No/' said they, But if you are my old assistants you must know something about it/' said K. F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. 
It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. 
Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. I see, Land Surveyor, that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, before you can become a serviceable janitor. 
Your total lack of consideration in letting us freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with your fist on the straw sack f_" Arthur, a man who feels a single cross word for days f_" and in chasing me up and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an hour before f could recover from it And I'm no longer young " My dear Jeremiah,f__ said K., f__ you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater you should complain to. Here before your eyes I snap this switch which was intended for you, for it wasnf_Tt for fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so as to surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a few times. And it's not mere forgetting, it's something more than that. 
It's difficult to speak of it even before   you, K., and when you Vc heard it all it's possiblef_" isn't it f_" that you'll go away and not want to have anything more to do with us, however little it may seem to concern you. There's a great official in the Castle called Sortini." " I've heard of him already," said K., " he had something to do with bring- ing me here." " I don't think so," said Olga, " Sortini 'hardly ever comes into the open. And that something more was Klamm. The landlady doesn't claim to know what you want from Klamm, she merely maintains that before you knew me you strove as eagerly to reach Klamm as you have done since. He had been persuaded that in this village everybody meant something to him, and indeed he was   not mistaken, it was only for these people here that he could feel not the slightest interest. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. 
And finally, as we might have foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of the Fire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me, Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop from weakness in the lungs, a serious man who never could laugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired, whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputy Captain, and to whom he had now to say that the Brigade required his services no longer and asked for the return of his diploma. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. It was doubtless his satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that had preserved in him a marked residue of something healthily childlike. F_~ Why all this T Why all this ' he wondered, and from under lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official discussing difficult questions with him, but only like   something that was preventing him from sleeping and whose further meaning he could not discover. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' ** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. An official decision is, after all, not just something like, for instance, this medicine bottle, standing here on this little table. 

But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. So something must have changed on your side, through the of strangers or in some way or other. No, don't let us talk about it any more." " Yes, don't let us talk of this," said K., " but of something else, Frieda. " No, Amalia made that for him long before he became a messenger. 
" I donf_Tt doubt that for a moment, but we were speaking of the time before your marriage, and it must have been an extraordinary thing at that stage for Hansf_Ts family to on the marriage f_" at a money sacrifice, or at least at such a great risk as the handing over of the inn must have been f_" and without trusting in anything but your   powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, and Hans's powers of work, which everybody must have known beforehand were nil." " Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I know what you're getting at and how wide you are of the mark. Only think, up there you have all the inextricable complications of a great authority f_" ^I imagined that I had an approximate conception of its nature before I came here, but how childish my ideas were f_" up there, then, you have the authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." " Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that dishonours its object. Do you call it reverence that leads Barnabas to abuse the privilege of admission to that room by spending his time there doing nothing, or makes him when he comes down again belittle and d^espise the men before whom he has just been trembling, or allows him because he's depressed or weary to put off delivering letters and fail in executing commissions entrusted to him That's far from being reverence. Are you amazed " " No, I was expecting something of the sort ; didn't I say you re not only a landlady, you're aiming at something else." " I am only aiming at dressing beautifully, and you arc either a fool or a child or a very' wicked, dangerous    person. As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. Perhaps that was all it was, but perhaps it was something quite different. But how should the others not also admire what is good enough for Klamm And so, before anyone knows what is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- room is hardly good enough for her any more. What- ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." Petitions " And what did we do meanwhile The worst thing we could have done, something much more deserving of contempt than our original offence f_" we betrayed Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- ness. I was jealous, and cried half the night before the celebration. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is something he's pretty good at. 
F_~ Be Klamm's mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the  tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad that things remained the way they were. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. Once more the landlord looked back at him before disappearing through a doorway, and K. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. Itm II too, these questions seemed useless, he admitted that the boy was right ; besides there was something humiliating in ferreting out family secrets by taking advantage of a child ; doubly humiliating, however, was the fact that in spite of his effort she had learned nothing. Did his best to find every- thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating his message word for word, not however as he had given it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before Klamm. And there she whispered something so low that K. 
  then he gave a start, and seemed to be looking round for something he had only just missedf_" but there was nothing missingf_" and said tliat Brunswick had told him some story of a messenger and a torn-up letter, did we know anything of it, who was concerned in it, and what it was all about  We kept silent ; Barnabas, who was as youthful then as a spring Iamb, said something particularly silly or cheeky, the subject was changed, and the whole affair forgottefi/* Amaliaf_Ts Punishment ** But not long afterwards we were overwhelmed with questions from all sides about the story of the letter, we were visited by friends and enemies, acquaint- ances and complete strangers. Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. He asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then he asked whether there was any other way out of the house, there was one through the yard, only one had to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden and walk through it before one reached the street. And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. 
Oh, you are fine   fellows said K., do you know anything about sur- veying ** No/' said they, But if you are my old assistants you must know something about it/' said K. Yet this is something scarcely anjf_Tone will do, it is almost senseless. Surely you donf_Tt want me to undertake something and, as a consequence of insufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances and for that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage you and myself in a way that is beyond repair.f__ f__ No, K.,f__ Olga said after a pause, f__ I donf_Tt want that and there- fore it would be better if everything could be left as it was,f__ f__ I donf_Tt think,f__ K. Then shall remain good friends in spite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihout your friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lo spend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting, only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot be postponed, could have justified that." K. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. A little time went by before she looked up, passed her hand over her eyes, and said : " This wrap was given me by Klamm. Klamm gives nothing of himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about there, one can get it out of him.f__ f_> K. If he had been planted sqjiarely before his desk K. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. What importance, for example, had the power, merely formal up till now, which Klamm exercised over K.'s services, compared with the very real power which Klamm possessed in K.f_Ts bedroom So it came about that while a light and frivolous bearing, a certain deliberate lessness was sufficient when one came in direct contact with the authorities, one needed in everything else the greatest caution, and had to look round on every side before one made a single step. The landlady doesn't claim to know what you want from Klamm, she merely maintains that before you knew me you strove as eagerly to reach Klamm as you have done since. The only difference was this, that before you knew me you were without any hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly and even with advantage to yourself. Since in reality nothing extra could be done for him in return for those extra payments, clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving something in return, promising to look the matter up,   and hinting that they were on the track of something, and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, they would follow it upf_" and fathtr, instead of growing sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. 
When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was going back to her friends with empty hands What   a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above all by K. " Look what Klamm has written " said K., holding the letter before his face. Almost allowed himself to be seduced by it again into believing Barnabas f_" " I'll certiinly see to it, and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me last time as well." " What " cried K., " haven't you seen to that yet then  Weren't you at the Castle next ay " " No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seen him yourself, and there happened to be a great deal of work just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be going to the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinking of, you incomprehensible fellow  " cried K., beating his brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs come before everything else, then You're in an important position, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me in this wretched manner What does your father's work matter  Klamm is waiting for this information, and instead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him, you prefer to clean the stable " " My father is a cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had orders from Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant." " Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. F_o Barnabas,*f_T said K., and could not keep his voice from trembling, f__ I have something else to say to you. When an ail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it may happen, even before the matter has been fully con- sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes in some unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be found any longer later on, a decision that settles the matter, if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. 


He had been persuaded that in this village everybody meant something to him, and indeed he was   not mistaken, it was only for these people here that he could feel not the slightest interest. How startled I was f_" but that was only a superficial fear without   deeper causef_" when you said to-day that before you knew me you had gone about here in a blind circle. It was through me that the landlady had become your enemy, a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under- value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought, that you had to fight for your post, that you were at a disadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you had to humble yourself before the teacher and were de- livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for my sake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. 

" What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. Are you amazed " " No, I was expecting something of the sort ; didn't I say you re not only a landlady, you're aiming at something else." " I am only aiming at dressing beautifully, and you arc either a fool or a child or a very' wicked, dangerous    person. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. I met her for the first time the night before last, she used to be a chambermaid. She saw me through the window as I was coming for beer, and ran to the door and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for a long time and promise her the ribbon from my hair before she would let me in. If he had been planted sqjiarely before his desk K. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. K.'s small change  of underclothes hanging before the fire f_" Frieda must have washed them early in the morning f_" did not spoil the impression much. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. To distract Frieda's mind a little, and he begged her to bring him something to eat for he had had nothing since midday. In appearance good, childish, merry, irre- sponsible youths, fallen from the sky, from the Castle, a dash of childhood's memories with them too ; all that of course must have seemed very nice, especially when I was the antithesis of it all, and was always running after affairs moreover which were scarcely compre- hensible, which were exasperating to you, and which threw me together with people whom you considered deserving of your hate f_" something of which you carried over to me too, in spite of all my innocence. Oh, you are fine   fellows said K., do you know anything about sur- veying ** No/' said they, But if you are my old assistants you must know something about it/' said K. F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. True, my husband is a burden to me too, but after all, he doesn't try to take the helm, and even if he did try, he might do something stupid, I dare say, but, as a native, nothing, after all, tliat would be^ ruinous ; but you are full of very dangerous mis- conceptions and you will never lose them. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. 
** I havenf_Tt met the Count yet,f__ said K., f__ but he pays well for good work, doesnf_Tt he When a man like me travels so far from home he wants to go back with something in his pockets.f__ f__ 'rheref_Ts no need for the gentleman to worry about that kind of thing ; nobody complains of being badly paid.f__ f__ Well,f__ said K., f__ If_Tm not one of your timid people, and can give a piece of my mind even to a Count, but of course itf_Ts much better to have everything settled up without any trouble.f__ I'lic landlord sat opposite K. " Who is  l that?f__ asked K., f__ the Count?f__ He was standing before the portrait and did not look round at the land- lord. 
Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. Oh, you are fine   fellows said K., do you know anything about sur- veying ** No/' said they, But if you are my old assistants you must know something about it/' said K. 
As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. " Granted that all this is so, I should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department all these years ago f_" saying that a Land Surveyor   should be asked to come f_" was an act of friendship towards myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here and then threatened with being thrown out again." " There's a certain amount of truth in your view of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle arc not to be taken literally. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. So you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that is, of which I neednf_Tt be ashamed as your future wife. The landlord and his wife were still standing before him as though even now he still constituted a certain menace, as^ chough in view of his utter unreliability it were not quite impossible that he might here suddenly start up and try to invade the passage once again. Now, however, when I leave this room, the protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at it, but you did not understand me. If I hadnf_Tt happened to catch you just now f_" how you fly along, I thought you were still in the house f_" who knows how long I might have had to wait for your next appearance.f__ f_oYou can ask the Chief,f__ said Barnabas, f_o to send me at definite times appointed by yourself.f__ f_o Even that would not suflicc,f__ said K., f_o I might have nothing to say for a year at a time, but something of urgent importance might occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,f__ f_o Well,f__ said Barnabas, f_o shall I report to the Chief that between him and you some other means of com- munication should be established instead of me f__ f_o No, no,f__ sSaid K., f_o not at all, I only mention the matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough to catch you.f__ f_o Shall we go back to the inn,f__ said Barnabas, f_o so that you can give me the new message* there? Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. 
Good night Sleep well " He could hardly have left the room' before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside K. Said, more out of good humour than any hope of beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- position on their faces he added* by way of excusing them : We three shall go to tk f_Tllage Superintendent afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to say before going ; f_~f_~We could wait here," But K. Half- qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. How often I've implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemenf_Ts servants, he could surely have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stalls. True, my husband is a burden to me too, but after all, he doesn't try to take the helm, and even if he did try, he might do something stupid, I dare say, but, as a native, nothing, after all, tliat would be^ ruinous ; but you are full of very dangerous mis- conceptions and you will never lose them. Did not believe he was giving way to a compulsion-f_" otherwise he would not have done it f_" but felt as if he were renouncing something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. Had gone and who had therefore, at f_~f_~that time incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time before K. In that case it might even have been part of my plan to appear before you arm-in-arm with Olga so as to evoke your pity, and the landlady has simply forgotten to mention that too in her list of my offences. " Look what Klamm has written " said K., holding the letter before his face. All this activity of Frieda's was something of which K. Sud- denly f_" hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was against nature f_" suddenly it was she who drove away K.,  ^  the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the scandal associated with her much more alluring than formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, whereas how everyone was again convinced. " Yes," the gentle- mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. If I keep ant thing from you, it is only from fear of you, and this fear is something I do not hide from you, but show quire openly. Then finally the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the first sound comes through." " I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. F_o Well, come in," said K., pushing them before him into the house. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. 

He could not say anything to his mother before his* father left, otherwise his father would come to hear of it and the whole plan would be scotched, and so he could only mention it later ; but even then, out of consideration for his mother, it could not be mentioned    suddenly and startlingly, but must be said slowly and when a suitable opportunity occurred ; only then could he beg his mother to agree, only then could he fetch K. 

The passage itself was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, who was sitting before one of the doors. 

Then when the worst was past and father was able again to struggle cautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him on each side, Amalia withdrew into the background again and left him to us."   Olga's Plans *' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupation for father that he was still fit for, something that at least would make him believe that he was helping to remove the burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of the kind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact would have been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch's garden, but \ found something that actually gave me a little hope. " What do you mean," the landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' What do you mean by making such senseless remarks It's simply quite senseless. Are you amazed " " No, I was expecting something of the sort ; didn't I say you re not only a landlady, you're aiming at something else." " I am only aiming at dressing beautifully, and you arc either a fool or a child or a very' wicked, dangerous    person. 
This babel of voices in the rooms had something extremely merry about it. Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had never noticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn't be placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in the habit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^ it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly out of their mouths before they were forgotten, only of course people were always ready to be taken in again next time. " The Superintendent is afraid that, if the decision in your case takes too long, you might do something rash on your own account. And how seriously they were taking the matter The teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, must of course have been told to run here by the Super- intendent. But where were you two " " Madam," said K., before the assistants had time to answer, " these are my assistants. My plan was turned down even before I had finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as he was in no state now to go there every day himself, we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. And I've achieif^d something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will blame me for. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. To Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com- manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he   wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. 

And finally, as we might have foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of the Fire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me, Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop from weakness in the lungs, a serious man who never could laugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired, whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputy Captain, and to whom he had now to say that the Brigade required his services no longer and asked for the return of his diploma. Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable so much the better, and the one way he could have made things difficult for the Captain would have been by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said two words. If I give Arthur something to do you must both do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the advantage that you will both be equally responsible for anything I tell you to do. Had never before heard on a telephone. I only indicate this possibility, but I know the following for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile that a query had gone out from the Department A to the Town Council many years before regarding a L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till then. Did his best to find every- thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating his message word for word, not however as he had given it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before Klamm. And there she whispered something so low that K. Surely you donf_Tt want me to undertake something and, as a consequence of insufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances and for that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage you and myself in a way that is beyond repair.f__ f__ No, K.,f__ Olga said after a pause, f__ I donf_Tt want that and there- fore it would be better if everything could be left as it was,f__ f__ I donf_Tt think,f__ K. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. Sordini, at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick f_" how could Brunswick deceive Sordini f_" but simply to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of data was necessary, and long before it was ended Brunswick had already thought out something new ; he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with his stupidity. It's difficult to speak of it even before   you, K., and when you Vc heard it all it's possiblef_" isn't it f_" that you'll go away and not want to have anything more to do with us, however little it may seem to concern you. There's a great official in the Castle called Sortini." " I've heard of him already," said K., " he had something to do with bring- ing me here." " I don't think so," said Olga, " Sortini 'hardly ever comes into the open. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is something he's pretty good at. 

She came to summon the landlord, for the Chief wanted something or other. " If you've been asked to come you're probably needed, that's an exceptional case, but we small people stick to our tradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no," said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybody here." And taking them all by surprise he made an adroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. Felt he could risk something f_" f_o Tm surprised that you have the nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little horse. Of course on the other hand one could argue that Schwarzer's attitude was something K. 
And so in reality I was com- pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only one who could make herself understood to my parents, and the more I followed, in my own way, the original plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with any of them during those two years. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. 
