Short Prose Dream 20201222102856245664

Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. 
It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. But another came all right, a man whom I hate. When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. 

F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. Decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the others were only to follow when he called them ; he adopted this policy on the one hand because he did not want the position to be compromised in advance by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking of Barnabas and the future. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. Next morning we were roused from our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; the others rolled back into their beds again, but I was com- pletely awake and ran to her. Hardly had I finished it when Amalia after a brief glance at me took it back, but she couldn't bring herself to read it again, and tearing it in pieces she threw the fragments in die face of the man outiade and shut the window. 
Next morning we were roused from our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; the others rolled back into their beds again, but I was com- pletely awake and ran to her. The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. 
For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. Nevertheless we are obliged to keep such a watch over Klamm's comft)rt that we remove even disturbances that are not sucli for him f_" and probably there are none whatsoever for him f_" if they strike us as being possible disturbances. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away   ^ again, but, for the time being, she must return. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. 
Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. Amalia smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed again, but never so completely. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. At first tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner, and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying : In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into the stall, all of you " When they saw that she was in earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a kind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under the impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a current of night air through which they all vanished with Frieda behind them openly driving them across the courtyard into the stalls. 
But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. Amalia smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed again, but never so completely. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. Before Khftnm, on the way to Klamm Was nor precisely this afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark was after all seriously underestimating the distance sepaftting him from Klamm  If it was at all possible to    reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); on this way there were also to be found, for instance, Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. If she had only made some pretence of com- pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But what is all this about punishment and advocates " said K. Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,   he orders first one and then another to come to him, puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to go just as he ordered them to come. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. 

" Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. If new work hadnf_Tt come rushing in as ever from every side, and if your case hadnf_Tt been a very unimportant case f_" one might almost say the   least important among the unimportant f_" ^we mig^ all of us liave breathed freely again, I fancy eve Sordini himself ; Brunswick was the only one that grumbled, but that was only ridiculous. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. 


" Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. Dearest, take them back again, don't sin against him who perhaps sent them." K. For isn't It time for him to marry and set up house for liiinsclf And instead of that he is frittering his powers away between his handicraft and being a messenger, standing in front of th^ desk up there, on the look-out for a glance from the official who looks like Klamm, and in the end gets an old dusty letter that is no good to anyone and only causes confusion in the world." " But that is yet another and quite different question," K. 
But another came all right, a man whom I hate. True, I have another assistant for the writing that* has to be done, the teacher ; but all the same it's impossible to get things shipshape, there's always a lot of business that has to be left lying, it has been put away in that chest there," and he pointed to another cabinet. Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away   ^ again, but, for the time being, she must return. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. But how was it possible to do the cleaning quietly when the gentlemen occupied their rooms for several days on end, and the men-servants, dirty lot that they were, pottered about there into the bargain, and when the chamber-maid was finally allowed to go into the room, it was in such a state that not even the Flood could wash it clean? But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds.   tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. 

We were no longer spoken of as ordinary human beings, our very name was never mentione^, if they had to refer to us they called us Barnabas's jpeople, for he was the least guilty ; even our cottage gained in evil reputation, and you yourself must admit, if you're honest, that on your rst entry into it you thought it justified its reputation ; later on, when people occasionally visited us again, they used to screw up their n<A-ses at the nK>st trivial things, for instance, because the little oil-lamp hung over the table. And in any case even if an official stepped out of his carriage and was willing to take up the matter, how could he get any clear idea of the affair from the mumblings of a poor, tired, ageing man like father Officials are  ^ highly educated, but one-sided ; in his own depart- ment an official can grasp whole trains of thought from a single word, but let him have soriething from another department explained to him by tlJe hour, he may nod politely, but he won't understand a word of it. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. Two old people there rose to their feet, a man and a woman, as well as another girl. All the houses in the village resembled one another more or less, but still a few small differences were immediately apparent here ; the ffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern was fixed over the doorway. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. But I fancy that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, what is transacted in the offices and can be construed again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices and threatened by their encroachments, which are so meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- ness of the danger. 
What strengthened him in this assumption was the fact that sometimes, always when he happened not to be looking, the bag, having been exposed to view for long enough, was suddenly and hastily pulled into the room and the door then remained as motionless as before, the doors round about then also became quiet again, disappointed or, it might be, content that this object of constant provocation had at last been removed, but then, howeifor^ they gradually came into motion again. If she had only made some pretence of com- pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But what is all this about punishment and advocates " said K. Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,   he orders first one and then another to come to him, puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to go just as he ordered them to come. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. The Land Surveyor knows how extra- ordinary his request is, but he will exert himself to make his disturbance of the Director as little felt as possible ; he submits himself to any and every limitation of time, also any stipulation which may be considered necessary as to the number of words which may be allowed him during the interview, even with ten words he believes he will be able to manage. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. 

Locked the door behind them they tried to get   in again, whimpered outside and knocked on the door. The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. 

Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. But, then again, of course, these opportunities are in accord with the general ^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. You're twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite way. Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. 
Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. But how was it possible to do the cleaning quietly when the gentlemen occupied their rooms for several days on end, and the men-servants, dirty lot that they were, pottered about there into the bargain, and when the chamber-maid was finally allowed to go into the room, it was in such a state that not even the Flood could wash it clean? But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. The experiment could not be so very dangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr would doubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room it would still be possible to apologise and go away again, and if the inmate was asleep, which was what was probable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ; it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, for then K. The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. 

  tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. 
For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. 

And if this method was not successful or if at one door this seemed to him not the right approach, he would try another method. Finally there remained only one gentleman who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he would burst out again, no less furiously than before. Barnabas had not gone to the Castle now, but he would go in the morning, and even if that girl from the Castle did not come here, another one would. Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather this from his appearance and his speech ; one observed it only in the confessions wormed out of him as it were after the event, by chance or by deliberation. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. With his eyes from the distance, naturally enough, for apart from the school-children there was not another human being in sight. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. All the houses in the village resembled one another more or less, but still a few small differences were immediately apparent here ; the ffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern was fixed over the doorway. Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. 

And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. Now of course all these differences aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope or despair which are possible for him when he sees Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only for a second or two. If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is tliere in the village to keep us But for the time being, darling, we'll accept the offer, wonf_Tt we I've fetched the teacher back again, you've only to say to him * Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." " It's a great nuisance," said K. The little barrow stopped outside most of the doors, usually then, too, the door would open and the appropriate files, sometimes, however, only a small sheet of paperf_" in such cases a little conversation came about between the room and the passage, probab y t Ar   servant was being reproached f_" ^would be handed into the room. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 


Surely you're not afraid f_" an ignorant man thinks everything possible " f_" here K. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. 
But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. Before Khftnm, on the way to Klamm Was nor precisely this afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark was after all seriously underestimating the distance sepaftting him from Klamm  If it was at all possible to    reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); on this way there were also to be found, for instance, Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. Said he had had the impression that she wanted to speak to him again, he apologised if that had been a mistake, and for   the rest he must go now anyway, he had left the school, where he was caretaker, to itself much too long, yesterday's summons was to blame for everything, he still had too, little experience of these matters, it would certainly not happen again that he would cause the landlady such inconvenience and bother as yesterday. Spoke of his fatigue of the previous day, saying it was quite possible that he had talked some nonsense, in any case he could not remember now. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away   ^ again, but, for the time being, she must return. Once it sounded like the jubilation of children getting ready for a picnic, another time like daybreak in a hen-roost, like the joy of being in complete accord with the awakening day. But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. Two old people there rose to their feet, a man and a woman, as well as another girl. All the houses in the village resembled one another more or less, but still a few small differences were immediately apparent here ; the ffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern was fixed over the doorway. The worst thing about the story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easily have been made good, I don't know why you lay such exaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letter from Sortini shame Amalia for ever f_" which is what one would gather from your story, but that's a sheer impossibility, it would have been easy to make up for it to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing might have blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed, and not Amalia. At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. " Besides there's another distinction still between your case and Frieda's. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 

WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. 

Now of course all these differences aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope or despair which are possible for him when he sees Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only for a second or two. " Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. 
" Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. You're twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite way. Who knows what would have happened if the landlady and Momus had not been K."s antagonists or at least had not dared to show that antagonism It was possible and probable that even then K. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. 



I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. 

And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. " Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. But the splinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again, he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. Never- theless, at the sight of Burgers bare chest a thought that was part his dream brushed his awareness : Here you have your Greek god I Go on, haul him out of bed There is, however,*' Btirgel said, his face thoughtfully tilted towards the ceiling, as though he were searching his memory for examples, but without being able to find any, ** there is, however, nevertheless, in spite of all precautionary measures, a way in which it is possible for the applicants to exploit this nocturnal weakness of the secretaries f_" always assuming that it is a weakness f_" to their own advantage. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. But another came all right, a man whom I hate. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. But when my fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran   out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at the broken door, and thatf_Ts why they say now f_" but theyf_Tre only children f__ True, the assistants kept on shaking their heads during Friedaf_Ts story, pointed again at K. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- bration and telling us his plans in connection with the Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the celebration, and there had been much discussion about it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from the village ; there were several possible candidates, but father had hopes that he would be chosen. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. Shared out the remaining work ; the assistants were to bring in wood and light the fire, but in the other classrooms first, from which another and greater danger threatened, for the teacher himself was probably already there. Said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it Hansf_Ts mother would not let K. To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). Though the passage itself was still empty, the doors were already in motion, time and again one would be opened a little and quickly shut again, the passage buzzed with this opening and shutting of doors, now and then, too, in the space above the partition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling, K. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. Was annoyed at being ordered about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach- man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being f_~Sur- prised by Klamm in the sledge. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. But when my fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran   out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at the broken door, and thatf_Ts why they say now f_" but theyf_Tre only children f__ True, the assistants kept on shaking their heads during Friedaf_Ts story, pointed again at K. In Frieda's case it didn't happen that Klamm never summoned her again, on the contrary he summoned her but she didn't obey. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. 
But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. Had seen in the working of the administration here, admittedly it was possible that he had misunderstood this too. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda doubtless did manage everything quite differently. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Before Khftnm, on the way to Klamm Was nor precisely this afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark was after all seriously underestimating the distance sepaftting him from Klamm  If it was at all possible to    reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); on this way there were also to be found, for instance, Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. But another came all right, a man whom I hate. When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. 

But the steam was coming from another :orner, where in a wooden tub larger than any K. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, even if only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult to the messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly, everything might be put right if one could propitiate the messenger. 
For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. 
" In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landlady said, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by   accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that time deputising for the head of anotlier department, thatf_Ts why it says : f_~ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.f_T I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrarf_Ts office with* the document, didnf_Tt even take off my wedditig- dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document, read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildish eagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate the signature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers of paper with writing, and never noticed that Hans was standing behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, and watching me at my work. But I fancy that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, what is transacted in the offices and can be construed again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices and threatened by their encroachments, which are so meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- ness of the danger. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)f_T   J customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under his arm, for the little table was knocked over the moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, solemnly, as though it must be" like this. 
Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. Admittedly he is not in a good state, he was not expecting the summons, hence he had gone on various errands in the village with regard to his cause, you know by this time he has more connections here than families that have been living here for centuries, all these connections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyor affair of his and, since they are the result of hard fighting and have to be fought for over and over again, an eye must be kept on them all the time. 

The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. Barnabas had not gone to the Castle now, but he would go in the morning, and even if that girl from the Castle did not come here, another one would. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. But then what was there that was worthy of belief in these tales It was im- possible to make certain of that, but that there was very little was clear. But when my fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran   out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at the broken door, and thatf_Ts why they say now f_" but theyf_Tre only children f__ True, the assistants kept on shaking their heads during Friedaf_Ts story, pointed again at K. Locked the door behind them they tried to get   in again, whimpered outside and knocked on the door. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. Reaching her he took her by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro- perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questions with his eyes holding hers. It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. Said he had had the impression that she wanted to speak to him again, he apologised if that had been a mistake, and for   the rest he must go now anyway, he had left the school, where he was caretaker, to itself much too long, yesterday's summons was to blame for everything, he still had too, little experience of these matters, it would certainly not happen again that he would cause the landlady such inconvenience and bother as yesterday. Spoke of his fatigue of the previous day, saying it was quite possible that he had talked some nonsense, in any case he could not remember now. 
Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there was still another and another to look at, until he let his eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- understood him at first and began to approach him, father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted hand and then waved us way. 
Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. 
Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 

At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. But another came all right, a man whom I hate. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. We were no longer spoken of as ordinary human beings, our very name was never mentione^, if they had to refer to us they called us Barnabas's jpeople, for he was the least guilty ; even our cottage gained in evil reputation, and you yourself must admit, if you're honest, that on your rst entry into it you thought it justified its reputation ; later on, when people occasionally visited us again, they used to screw up their n<A-ses at the nK>st trivial things, for instance, because the little oil-lamp hung over the table. And in any case even if an official stepped out of his carriage and was willing to take up the matter, how could he get any clear idea of the affair from the mumblings of a poor, tired, ageing man like father Officials are  ^ highly educated, but one-sided ; in his own depart- ment an official can grasp whole trains of thought from a single word, but let him have soriething from another department explained to him by tlJe hour, he may nod politely, but he won't understand a word of it. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. If new work hadnf_Tt come rushing in as ever from every side, and if your case hadnf_Tt been a very unimportant case f_" one might almost say the   least important among the unimportant f_" ^we mig^ all of us liave breathed freely again, I fancy eve Sordini himself ; Brunswick was the only one that grumbled, but that was only ridiculous. Though the passage itself was still empty, the doors were already in motion, time and again one would be opened a little and quickly shut again, the passage buzzed with this opening and shutting of doors, now and then, too, in the space above the partition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling, K. The little barrow stopped outside most of the doors, usually then, too, the door would open and the appropriate files, sometimes, however, only a small sheet of paperf_" in such cases a little conversation came about between the room and the passage, probab y t Ar   servant was being reproached f_" ^would be handed into the room. But then what was there that was worthy of belief in these tales It was im- possible to make certain of that, but that there was very little was clear. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. 

When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. " Besides there's another distinction still between your case and Frieda's. 
At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. ** Mizzi, my foot is beginning to throb again, we must renew the compress.** K. 
The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. But itf_Ts not of such a nature that you can simply fall on   Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged to see Klamm if I answer your questions ' when a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness of his reply. 
The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. True, I have another assistant for the writing that* has to be done, the teacher ; but all the same it's impossible to get things shipshape, there's always a lot of business that has to be left lying, it has been put away in that chest there," and he pointed to another cabinet. Replied bluntly, letting his gaze wander from the assistants to #:he Superinfendent and back again, and finding on the faces of all three the same smile. You're twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite way. But itf_Ts not of such a nature that you can simply fall on   Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged to see Klamm if I answer your questions ' when a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness of his reply. 
Hardly had I finished it when Amalia after a brief glance at me took it back, but she couldn't bring herself to read it again, and tearing it in pieces she threw the fragments in die face of the man outiade and shut the window. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klammf_Ts mistress, throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the lowest of the low. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. 
In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. Was annoyed at being ordered about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach- man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being f_~Sur- prised by Klamm in the sledge. But itf_Ts not of such a nature that you can simply fall on   Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged to see Klamm if I answer your questions ' when a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness of his reply. Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- bration and telling us his plans in connection with the Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the celebration, and there had been much discussion about it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from the village ; there were several possible candidates, but father had hopes that he would be chosen. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. F_o But," here the Superintendent interrupted himself as if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, or as if at least it were possible that he had gone too far, " doesn't the story bore you " No," said K., " it amuses me." Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not telling it to amuse you." " It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives me an insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certain circumstances may decide the life of a human being." " You havenf_Tt been given any insight into that yet,"   replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can go on with my story. 

Shared out the remaining work ; the assistants were to bring in wood and light the fire, but in the other classrooms first, from which another and greater danger threatened, for the teacher himself was probably already there. Decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the others were only to follow when he called them ; he adopted this policy on the one hand because he did not want the position to be compromised in advance by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking of Barnabas and the future. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. " Besides there's another distinction still between your case and Frieda's. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. Was already in tlic hall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again, when the landlady shouted after him : f_o I am getting a new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send for you. Admittedly he is not in a good state, he was not expecting the summons, hence he had gone on various errands in the village with regard to his cause, you know by this time he has more connections here than families that have been living here for centuries, all these connections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyor affair of his and, since they are the result of hard fighting and have to be fought for over and over again, an eye must be kept on them all the time. Now of course all these differences aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope or despair which are possible for him when he sees Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only for a second or two. Seeing that he could not achieve anything by frontal assault, he would try another method, for instance, if K. But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klammf_Ts mistress, throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the lowest of the low. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. " Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. The officials preferred indeed to get through their business in the taproom or in their rooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bed before retiring for the night, or in the morning when they were too weary to get up and wanted to stretch themselves for a little longer. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, even if only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult to the messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly, everything might be put right if one could propitiate the messenger. When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. F_o I'm glad you've come.f__ f__ Well,f__ he said, after another pause, f__ you've come very late, youf_Tre very slack.f__ f__ It was a long way to come,f__ said one of them. Surely you're not afraid f_" an ignorant man thinks everything possible " f_" here K. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached the original department f_" I'll call it A f_" but by mistake went to another department, B. F_o But," here the Superintendent interrupted himself as if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, or as if at least it were possible that he had gone too far, " doesn't the story bore you " No," said K., " it amuses me." Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not telling it to amuse you." " It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives me an insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certain circumstances may decide the life of a human being." " You havenf_Tt been given any insight into that yet,"   replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can go on with my story. Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. 

Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. Perhaps f_" it would be a bad thing, but it is possible f_" perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when I marry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I am free, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thijA- visit of mine to you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but I am still free, I can still, if something seems to me as important as Barnabasf_Ts affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it as exhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. 
But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Asked himself as if self-reproachfully, and took another sip. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. Barnabas had not gone to the Castle now, but he would go in the morning, and even if that girl from the Castle did not come here, another one would. Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather this from his appearance and his speech ; one observed it only in the confessions wormed out of him as it were after the event, by chance or by deliberation. 

" thc^ landlady said swiftly " I don't want to hear another word from you about clothes. ^ut there was yet another disturbance. 

But the splinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again, he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. 
To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. 
Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. What strengthened him in this assumption was the fact that sometimes, always when he happened not to be looking, the bag, having been exposed to view for long enough, was suddenly and hastily pulled into the room and the door then remained as motionless as before, the doors round about then also became quiet again, disappointed or, it might be, content that this object of constant provocation had at last been removed, but then, howeifor^ they gradually came into motion again. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. 

Listen, even with only the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn the bitterness of onef_Ts life, itf_Ts made bitter for us when we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe particularly, but youf_Tll like Emilie too, I've told them abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without believing them, as though outside the room nothing could really happen, itf_Ts warm and snug and tight there, and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired   of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. Said he had had the impression that she wanted to speak to him again, he apologised if that had been a mistake, and for   the rest he must go now anyway, he had left the school, where he was caretaker, to itself much too long, yesterday's summons was to blame for everything, he still had too, little experience of these matters, it would certainly not happen again that he would cause the landlady such inconvenience and bother as yesterday. They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)f_T   J customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under his arm, for the little table was knocked over the moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, solemnly, as though it must be" like this. 


You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. 
Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. Listen, even with only the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn the bitterness of onef_Ts life, itf_Ts made bitter for us when we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe particularly, but youf_Tll like Emilie too, I've told them abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without believing them, as though outside the room nothing could really happen, itf_Ts warm and snug and tight there, and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired   of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. The Land Surveyor knows how extra- ordinary his request is, but he will exert himself to make his disturbance of the Director as little felt as possible ; he submits himself to any and every limitation of time, also any stipulation which may be considered necessary as to the number of words which may be allowed him during the interview, even with ten words he believes he will be able to manage. To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. 
Reaching her he took her by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro- perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questions with his eyes holding hers. It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. If she had only made some pretence of com- pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But what is all this about punishment and advocates " said K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. But when my fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran   out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at the broken door, and thatf_Ts why they say now f_" but theyf_Tre only children f__ True, the assistants kept on shaking their heads during Friedaf_Ts story, pointed again at K. 

" thc^ landlady said swiftly " I don't want to hear another word from you about clothes. And what are these impossibilitjes you're talking about " Frieda had stopped working. Now you can perhaps refuse \\'hat you aic given, I donf_Tt know for sure, perhaps \'ou can rchf^e but if you have once accepted it, then upon it anJ  consequently upon you too there weighs the pressure of the authorities ; only if the authorities so \sf_Till can it be taken from you again, and in no other manner. " Besides there's another distinction still between your case and Frieda's. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. At first tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner, and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying : In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into the stall, all of you " When they saw that she was in earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a kind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under the impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a current of night air through which they all vanished with Frieda behind them openly driving them across the courtyard into the stalls. With some idea of securing his posi- tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. Now of course all these differences aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope or despair which are possible for him when he sees Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only for a second or two. When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. With his eyes from the distance, naturally enough, for apart from the school-children there was not another human being in sight. Said and saw only now that Amalia was back in the room again, but far away from them, at the parentsf_T table, ft*' There she is,f__^K. Perhaps f_" it would be a bad thing, but it is possible f_" perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when I marry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I am free, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thijA- visit of mine to you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but I am still free, I can still, if something seems to me as important as Barnabasf_Ts affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it as exhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. 
At last they stopped before a door which was not in any way different from the others, and yet behind which, so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. Reaching her he took her by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro- perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questions with his eyes holding hers. And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. Said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it is true i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemannf_Ts, but I prefer to stay with you people.*f_T ** At Lasemannf_Ts " Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then itf_Ts a misunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one who was at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once " K. And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. It's even possible that he's still waiting for her." The landlady remained silent, and only looked K. And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. 
And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. 
Now of course all these differences aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope or despair which are possible for him when he sees Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only for a second or two. Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. 

Next morning we were roused from our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; the others rolled back into their beds again, but I was com- pletely awake and ran to her. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. For isn't It time for him to marry and set up house for liiinsclf And instead of that he is frittering his powers away between his handicraft and being a messenger, standing in front of th^ desk up there, on the look-out for a glance from the official who looks like Klamm, and in the end gets an old dusty letter that is no good to anyone and only causes confusion in the world." " But that is yet another and quite different question," K. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. But the splinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again, he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. Never- theless, at the sight of Burgers bare chest a thought that was part his dream brushed his awareness : Here you have your Greek god I Go on, haul him out of bed There is, however,*' Btirgel said, his face thoughtfully tilted towards the ceiling, as though he were searching his memory for examples, but without being able to find any, ** there is, however, nevertheless, in spite of all precautionary measures, a way in which it is possible for the applicants to exploit this nocturnal weakness of the secretaries f_" always assuming that it is a weakness f_" to their own advantage. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. 
Office life, in particular, is so exhausting that it can only be done if all the smallest subsidiary circumstances are carefully watched and if possible no change is pei milted in this respect. At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. 
But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. Whenever there had been any talk of our guilt among officials or clerks or anybody else, it was only the insult to Sortini's messenger that had always been brought up, further than that nobody dared to go. Amalia smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed again, but never so completely. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. Said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it is true i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemannf_Ts, but I prefer to stay with you people.*f_T ** At Lasemannf_Ts " Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then itf_Ts a misunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one who was at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once " K. I've been taken on straight away for the taproom again, in spite of that fact that I didn't leave it with any great distinction, but, of course, I had a word put in for me. The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is tliere in the village to keep us But for the time being, darling, we'll accept the offer, wonf_Tt we I've fetched the teacher back again, you've only to say to him * Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." " It's a great nuisance," said K. " Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. 
This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. He began to stammer in confusion, however, when Amalia, giving him no time to say another word, interposed with an acceptance of the invitation ; then Olga was compelled to associate herself with it. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. 

Was annoyed at being ordered about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach- man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being f_~Sur- prised by Klamm in the sledge. Asked himself as if self-reproachfully, and took another sip. 
" In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landlady said, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by   accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that time deputising for the head of anotlier department, thatf_Ts why it says : f_~ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.f_T I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrarf_Ts office with* the document, didnf_Tt even take off my wedditig- dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document, read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildish eagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate the signature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers of paper with writing, and never noticed that Hans was standing behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, and watching me at my work. Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. All the houses in the village resembled one another more or less, but still a few small differences were immediately apparent here ; the ffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern was fixed over the doorway. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. 
Said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it is true i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemannf_Ts, but I prefer to stay with you people.*f_T ** At Lasemannf_Ts " Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then itf_Ts a misunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one who was at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once " K. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. 
Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. The experiment could not be so very dangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr would doubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room it would still be possible to apologise and go away again, and if the inmate was asleep, which was what was probable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ; it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, for then K. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. 
" Barnabas is familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm once through a carriage window in the village, or believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared to recognise him again, and yet f_" how can you explain this f_" when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. I How pleased they had all been with the dress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and when at the last moment it turned out that there was still room for another ribbon, the last dubt vanished. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. But you hid nothing, she repeated that again and again, and then she said afterwards : Try to listen to him carefully at the first favourable oppor- tunity, not superficially, but carefully, carefully. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. Now one of them is in fashion, and most carriages go by that, now it's another and everything drives pell-mell there. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. Though the passage itself was still empty, the doors were already in motion, time and again one would be opened a little and quickly shut again, the passage buzzed with this opening and shutting of doors, now and then, too, in the space above the partition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling, K. For anybody one has forgotten can come back to one's memory again, of course. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. Finally there remained only one gentleman who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he would burst out again, no less furiously than before. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. Now one of them is in fashion, and most carriages go by that, now it's another and everything drives pell-mell there. Shared out the remaining work ; the assistants were to bring in wood and light the fire, but in the other classrooms first, from which another and greater danger threatened, for the teacher himself was probably already there. Decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the others were only to follow when he called them ; he adopted this policy on the one hand because he did not want the position to be compromised in advance by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking of Barnabas and the future. 
" In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landlady said, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by   accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that time deputising for the head of anotlier department, thatf_Ts why it says : f_~ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.f_T I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrarf_Ts office with* the document, didnf_Tt even take off my wedditig- dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document, read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildish eagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate the signature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers of paper with writing, and never noticed that Hans was standing behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, and watching me at my work. Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. 
Now you can perhaps refuse \\'hat you aic given, I donf_Tt know for sure, perhaps \'ou can rchf^e but if you have once accepted it, then upon it anJ  consequently upon you too there weighs the pressure of the authorities ; only if the authorities so \sf_Till can it be taken from you again, and in no other manner. He began to stammer in confusion, however, when Amalia, giving him no time to say another word, interposed with an acceptance of the invitation ; then Olga was compelled to associate herself with it. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. 
Frieda   performed little offices for him. 
Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. 
But I fancy that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, what is transacted in the offices and can be construed again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices and threatened by their encroachments, which are so meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- ness of the danger. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. 
Decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the others were only to follow when he called them ; he adopted this policy on the one hand because he did not want the position to be compromised in advance by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking of Barnabas and the future. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. 
Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached the original department f_" I'll call it A f_" but by mistake went to another department, B. Probably you think that I'm much older than Hans, but the fact is that hef_Ts only two or three years younger than me and will never grow any older either, for at his work f_" smoking his pipe, listening to the customers, knocking out his pipe again, and fetching an occasional pot of beer f_" at that sort of work one doesnf_Tt grow old." " What youf_Tve done has been splendid," said K. And it became a long absence, he never went back again, and for weeks he never left his bed. 
Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. But then what was there that was worthy of belief in these tales It was im- possible to make certain of that, but that there was very little was clear. 
Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). 
But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. Who knows what would have happened if the landlady and Momus had not been K."s antagonists or at least had not dared to show that antagonism It was possible and probable that even then K. Then he changed the subject, perhaps he could get at the truth from another side ; as though there had not yet been any difference of opinion, he asked calmly : All that has been written about the after- noon All these papers are concerned with that " " All of them," Momus said pleasantly, as though he had been waiting for this question, "it is my work." If one has the strength to look at things unceasingly, so to speak without blinking, one sees a great deal ,* but if one falters only once and shuts one's eyes, everything instantly slips away into darkness. Now one of them is in fashion, and most carriages go by that, now it's another and everything drives pell-mell there. 
As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super- cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyes for a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'s senseless stupidity to his own sound reason again, ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly parted lips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the horses." Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side- glance at K., the coachman had now to get down in spite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly f_" as if he did not so much expect a counter-order from the gentleman as a sensible remark from K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. I How pleased they had all been with the dress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and when at the last moment it turned out that there was still room for another ribbon, the last dubt vanished. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. 

To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. The worst thing about the story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easily have been made good, I don't know why you lay such exaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letter from Sortini shame Amalia for ever f_" which is what one would gather from your story, but that's a sheer impossibility, it would have been easy to make up for it to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing might have blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed, and not Amalia. It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda doubtless did manage everything quite differently. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. 
With his eyes from the distance, naturally enough, for apart from the school-children there was not another human being in sight. But the steam was coming from another :orner, where in a wooden tub larger than any K. For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. Said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it Hansf_Ts mother would not let K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 

F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klammf_Ts mistress, throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the lowest of the low. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. You're twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite way. Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- bration and telling us his plans in connection with the Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the celebration, and there had been much discussion about it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from the village ; there were several possible candidates, but father had hopes that he would be chosen. Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. 

Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. 
^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. Asked time and again, but for a long time could not get any answer because his guilt was ^ too much a matter of course to the two of them and hence it simply did not occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. It was up to him, therefore, to appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, however, to disappear again, if possible even more quickly. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. 
But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. With his eyes from the distance, naturally enough, for apart from the school-children there was not another human being in sight. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. F_o I'm glad you've come.f__ f__ Well,f__ he said, after another pause, f__ you've come very late, youf_Tre very slack.f__ f__ It was a long way to come,f__ said one of them. But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. In such a large governmental office as the Countf_Ts, it may occasionally happen that one department ordains this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and f_>though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it comes by its nature too late, and so every now and then a trifling miscalculation arises. True, I have another assistant for the writing that* has to be done, the teacher ; but all the same it's impossible to get things shipshape, there's always a lot of business that has to be left lying, it has been put away in that chest there," and he pointed to another cabinet. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. 


Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. Surely you're not afraid f_" an ignorant man thinks everything possible " f_" here K. 
And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. I How pleased they had all been with the dress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and when at the last moment it turned out that there was still room for another ribbon, the last dubt vanished. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. Haven't you found that out He couldn't remain another day in his post if it weren't for his wife, who runs everything." " Mizzi " asked K. 
With some idea of securing his posi- tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. 
The worst thing about the story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easily have been made good, I don't know why you lay such exaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letter from Sortini shame Amalia for ever f_" which is what one would gather from your story, but that's a sheer impossibility, it would have been easy to make up for it to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing might have blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed, and not Amalia. 
And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. Nevertheless we are obliged to keep such a watch over Klamm's comft)rt that we remove even disturbances that are not sucli for him f_" and probably there are none whatsoever for him f_" if they strike us as being possible disturbances. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away   ^ again, but, for the time being, she must return. But the steam was coming from another :orner, where in a wooden tub larger than any K. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. 
Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. 
Was already in tlic hall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again, when the landlady shouted after him : f_o I am getting a new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send for you. Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. 
When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. 
I have asked her, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ; I, on the other hand, though I was only three times with Klamm f_" after that he never asked me to come again, I donf_Tt know why f_" I managed to bring three presents back with me all the same, having a pre- monition that my time would be short. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. For anybody one has forgotten can come back to one's memory again, of course. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. 

But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klammf_Ts mistress, throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the lowest of the low. We were no longer spoken of as ordinary human beings, our very name was never mentione^, if they had to refer to us they called us Barnabas's jpeople, for he was the least guilty ; even our cottage gained in evil reputation, and you yourself must admit, if you're honest, that on your rst entry into it you thought it justified its reputation ; later on, when people occasionally visited us again, they used to screw up their n<A-ses at the nK>st trivial things, for instance, because the little oil-lamp hung over the table. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. Asked time and again, but for a long time could not get any answer because his guilt was ^ too much a matter of course to the two of them and hence it simply did not occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. 
The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. You're twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite way. Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, even if only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult to the messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly, everything might be put right if one could propitiate the messenger. When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. Said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it is true i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemannf_Ts, but I prefer to stay with you people.*f_T ** At Lasemannf_Ts " Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then itf_Ts a misunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one who was at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once " K. 
But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. And it became a long absence, he never went back again, and for weeks he never left his bed. Whenever there had been any talk of our guilt among officials or clerks or anybody else, it was only the insult to Sortini's messenger that had always been brought up, further than that nobody dared to go. Finally there remained only one gentleman who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he would burst out again, no less furiously than before. Admittedly he is not in a good state, he was not expecting the summons, hence he had gone on various errands in the village with regard to his cause, you know by this time he has more connections here than families that have been living here for centuries, all these connections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyor affair of his and, since they are the result of hard fighting and have to be fought for over and over again, an eye must be kept on them all the time. And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. 
This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. 




But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. 
I have asked her, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ; I, on the other hand, though I was only three times with Klamm f_" after that he never asked me to come again, I donf_Tt know why f_" I managed to bring three presents back with me all the same, having a pre- monition that my time would be short. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. 
Surely you're not afraid f_" an ignorant man thinks everything possible " f_" here K. 
To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. It was up to him, therefore, to appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, however, to disappear again, if possible even more quickly. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. 
The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached the original department f_" I'll call it A f_" but by mistake went to another department, B. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. But if it wasn't as bad as all that, if it wasn't a sly beast of prey that seized you that night, but you came to meet me, just as I went to meet you, and we found one another without a thought for ourselves, in that case, Frieda, tell me, how would things look If that were really so, in acting for myself I was acting for you too, there is no distinction here, and only an enemy could draw it. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. With some idea of securing his posi- tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda doubtless did manage everything quite differently. Listen, even with only the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn the bitterness of onef_Ts life, itf_Ts made bitter for us when we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe particularly, but youf_Tll like Emilie too, I've told them abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without believing them, as though outside the room nothing could really happen, itf_Ts warm and snug and tight there, and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired   of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there was still another and another to look at, until he let his eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- understood him at first and began to approach him, father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted hand and then waved us way. Next morning we were roused from our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; the others rolled back into their beds again, but I was com- pletely awake and ran to her. 
It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 
Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. But, then again, of course, these opportunities are in accord with the general ^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. At first tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner, and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying : In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into the stall, all of you " When they saw that she was in earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a kind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under the impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a current of night air through which they all vanished with Frieda behind them openly driving them across the courtyard into the stalls. With some idea of securing his posi- tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. 
Decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the others were only to follow when he called them ; he adopted this policy on the one hand because he did not want the position to be compromised in advance by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking of Barnabas and the future. For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. 

The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. So if we had quietly come forward again and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, and reassured public opinion that it was never likely to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, everything would have been made all right in that way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as before, and even if we hadnf_Tt completely forgotten what had happened people would have understood and helped us to forget it completely. Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather this from his appearance and his speech ; one observed it only in the confessions wormed out of him as it were after the event, by chance or by deliberation. But the splinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again, he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. Who knows what would have happened if the landlady and Momus had not been K."s antagonists or at least had not dared to show that antagonism It was possible and probable that even then K. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super- cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyes for a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'s senseless stupidity to his own sound reason again, ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly parted lips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the horses." Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side- glance at K., the coachman had now to get down in spite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly f_" as if he did not so much expect a counter-order from the gentleman as a sensible remark from K. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga.   tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. 
But if it wasn't as bad as all that, if it wasn't a sly beast of prey that seized you that night, but you came to meet me, just as I went to meet you, and we found one another without a thought for ourselves, in that case, Frieda, tell me, how would things look If that were really so, in acting for myself I was acting for you too, there is no distinction here, and only an enemy could draw it. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. I have asked her, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ; I, on the other hand, though I was only three times with Klamm f_" after that he never asked me to come again, I donf_Tt know why f_" I managed to bring three presents back with me all the same, having a pre- monition that my time would be short. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. But another came all right, a man whom I hate.   tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. Was annoyed at being ordered about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach- man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being f_~Sur- prised by Klamm in the sledge. Asked himself as if self-reproachfully, and took another sip. Said, pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. But, then again, of course, these opportunities are in accord with the general ^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. 
It was up to him, therefore, to appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, however, to disappear again, if possible even more quickly. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds.   tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. Then he changed the subject, perhaps he could get at the truth from another side ; as though there had not yet been any difference of opinion, he asked calmly : All that has been written about the after- noon All these papers are concerned with that " " All of them," Momus said pleasantly, as though he had been waiting for this question, "it is my work." If one has the strength to look at things unceasingly, so to speak without blinking, one sees a great deal ,* but if one falters only once and shuts one's eyes, everything instantly slips away into darkness. Haven't you found that out He couldn't remain another day in his post if it weren't for his wife, who runs everything." " Mizzi " asked K. But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. With some idea of securing his posi- tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. Frieda   performed little offices for him. 
And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. But how was it possible to do the cleaning quietly when the gentlemen occupied their rooms for several days on end, and the men-servants, dirty lot that they were, pottered about there into the bargain, and when the chamber-maid was finally allowed to go into the room, it was in such a state that not even the Flood could wash it clean? And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- bration and telling us his plans in connection with the Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the celebration, and there had been much discussion about it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from the village ; there were several possible candidates, but father had hopes that he would be chosen. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. 
In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. The officials preferred indeed to get through their business in the taproom or in their rooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bed before retiring for the night, or in the morning when they were too weary to get up and wanted to stretch themselves for a little longer. Next morning we were roused from our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; the others rolled back into their beds again, but I was com- pletely awake and ran to her. But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. F_o But," here the Superintendent interrupted himself as if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, or as if at least it were possible that he had gone too far, " doesn't the story bore you " No," said K., " it amuses me." Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not telling it to amuse you." " It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives me an insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certain circumstances may decide the life of a human being." " You havenf_Tt been given any insight into that yet,"   replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can go on with my story. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. And what are these impossibilitjes you're talking about " Frieda had stopped working. Seeing that he could not achieve anything by frontal assault, he would try another method, for instance, if K. Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow them down one after another to the very dregs. Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. 

"You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. Only there's something I'd like to point out, I have some influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and that secures you against any danger arising out of my stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." " Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, " I know all that." Now was the time for K. At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. 

" In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landlady said, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by   accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that time deputising for the head of anotlier department, thatf_Ts why it says : f_~ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.f_T I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrarf_Ts office with* the document, didnf_Tt even take off my wedditig- dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document, read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildish eagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate the signature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers of paper with writing, and never noticed that Hans was standing behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, and watching me at my work. As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super- cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyes for a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'s senseless stupidity to his own sound reason again, ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly parted lips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the horses." Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side- glance at K., the coachman had now to get down in spite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly f_" as if he did not so much expect a counter-order from the gentleman as a sensible remark from K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away   ^ again, but, for the time being, she must return. 
Was already in tlic hall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again, when the landlady shouted after him : f_o I am getting a new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send for you. Now of course all these differences aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope or despair which are possible for him when he sees Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only for a second or two. 
And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. Though the passage itself was still empty, the doors were already in motion, time and again one would be opened a little and quickly shut again, the passage buzzed with this opening and shutting of doors, now and then, too, in the space above the partition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling, K. At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. Office life, in particular, is so exhausting that it can only be done if all the smallest subsidiary circumstances are carefully watched and if possible no change is pei milted in this respect. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. But itf_Ts not of such a nature that you can simply fall on   Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged to see Klamm if I answer your questions ' when a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness of his reply. Repeated, and the weariness he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had commanded  that they should stay with her He could quite well have found his own way home, and better done, in- deed, than in this company. 
He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. 

Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klammf_Ts mistress, throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the lowest of the low. And although it had to be one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda herself and had no loftier desire than f_" heavens above I f_" to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also at some time find something attractive. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there was still another and another to look at, until he let his eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- understood him at first and began to approach him, father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted hand and then waved us way. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. 
Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 

Replied bluntly, letting his gaze wander from the assistants to #:he Superinfendent and back again, and finding on the faces of all three the same smile. 

The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. Office life, in particular, is so exhausting that it can only be done if all the smallest subsidiary circumstances are carefully watched and if possible no change is pei milted in this respect. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. 

My instructions are only another proof of the Superintendent's kindness ; I want to emphasise that his kindness in this instance is incom- prehensible to me, and that I only carry out his in- structions because it's my duty and out of respect to the Superintendent." Washed and combed, K. If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is tliere in the village to keep us But for the time being, darling, we'll accept the offer, wonf_Tt we I've fetched the teacher back again, you've only to say to him * Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." " It's a great nuisance," said K. 
Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. Finally there remained only one gentleman who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he would burst out again, no less furiously than before. 
I have asked her, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ; I, on the other hand, though I was only three times with Klamm f_" after that he never asked me to come again, I donf_Tt know why f_" I managed to bring three presents back with me all the same, having a pre- monition that my time would be short. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. For anybody one has forgotten can come back to one's memory again, of course. All the houses in the village resembled one another more or less, but still a few small differences were immediately apparent here ; the ffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern was fixed over the doorway. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. True, I have another assistant for the writing that* has to be done, the teacher ; but all the same it's impossible to get things shipshape, there's always a lot of business that has to be left lying, it has been put away in that chest there," and he pointed to another cabinet. For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. And yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. In such a large governmental office as the Countf_Ts, it may occasionally happen that one department ordains this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and f_>though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it comes by its nature too late, and so every now and then a trifling miscalculation arises. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. 


But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. Asked time and again, but for a long time could not get any answer because his guilt was ^ too much a matter of course to the two of them and hence it simply did not occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. 
At once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini " " No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a suspicion, how can you believe that I don't know anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she does. And in any case even if an official stepped out of his carriage and was willing to take up the matter, how could he get any clear idea of the affair from the mumblings of a poor, tired, ageing man like father Officials are  ^ highly educated, but one-sided ; in his own depart- ment an official can grasp whole trains of thought from a single word, but let him have soriething from another department explained to him by tlJe hour, he may nod politely, but he won't understand a word of it. 
The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. You're twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite way. But itf_Ts not of such a nature that you can simply fall on   Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged to see Klamm if I answer your questions ' when a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness of his reply. Said he had had the impression that she wanted to speak to him again, he apologised if that had been a mistake, and for   the rest he must go now anyway, he had left the school, where he was caretaker, to itself much too long, yesterday's summons was to blame for everything, he still had too, little experience of these matters, it would certainly not happen again that he would cause the landlady such inconvenience and bother as yesterday. 
Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow them down one after another to the very dregs. It's even possible that he's still waiting for her." The landlady remained silent, and only looked K. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. With his eyes from the distance, naturally enough, for apart from the school-children there was not another human being in sight. But if it wasn't as bad as all that, if it wasn't a sly beast of prey that seized you that night, but you came to meet me, just as I went to meet you, and we found one another without a thought for ourselves, in that case, Frieda, tell me, how would things look If that were really so, in acting for myself I was acting for you too, there is no distinction here, and only an enemy could draw it. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Haven't you found that out He couldn't remain another day in his post if it weren't for his wife, who runs everything." " Mizzi " asked K. "You don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced f_" and you speak about it as only a stranger could f_" it's quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep here, and by some chance or other f_" and chances are always on the side of the gentlemen f_" ^you were dis- covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. Asked time and again, but for a long time could not get any answer because his guilt was ^ too much a matter of course to the two of them and hence it simply did not occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. It was up to him, therefore, to appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, however, to disappear again, if possible even more quickly. Now there seems to be another girl there. F_o I'm glad you've come.f__ f__ Well,f__ he said, after another pause, f__ you've come very late, youf_Tre very slack.f__ f__ It was a long way to come,f__ said one of them. " asked K., pointing to the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, coarse lips, and literally tortured faces f_" their heads * looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them to the present shape f_" and yet they ^were not exactly   gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and studied some indifferent object in the room before fixing on him again, and then K. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. At first tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner, and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying : In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into the stall, all of you " When they saw that she was in earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a kind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under the impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a current of night air through which they all vanished with Frieda behind them openly driving them across the courtyard into the stalls. They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)f_T   J customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under his arm, for the little table was knocked over the moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, solemnly, as though it must be" like this. 
When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. She stopped searching, saying, in exhaustion, only that it must be page ten. And yet I would do it, if it were possible, but It is not possible, and I am glad of it, at any rate   it is not possible here in the village. Surely you're not afraid f_" an ignorant man thinks everything possible " f_" here K. I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. It was up to him, therefore, to appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, however, to disappear again, if possible even more quickly. And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. 

Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. 


We were no longer spoken of as ordinary human beings, our very name was never mentione^, if they had to refer to us they called us Barnabas's jpeople, for he was the least guilty ; even our cottage gained in evil reputation, and you yourself must admit, if you're honest, that on your rst entry into it you thought it justified its reputation ; later on, when people occasionally visited us again, they used to screw up their n<A-ses at the nK>st trivial things, for instance, because the little oil-lamp hung over the table. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. But then what was there that was worthy of belief in these tales It was im- possible to make certain of that, but that there was very little was clear. 
At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. Seeing that he could not achieve anything by frontal assault, he would try another method, for instance, if K. And if this method was not successful or if at one door this seemed to him not the right approach, he would try another method. If she had only made some pretence of com- pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But what is all this about punishment and advocates " said K. Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,   he orders first one and then another to come to him, puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to go just as he ordered them to come. Finally there remained only one gentleman who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he would burst out again, no less furiously than before. Had seen in the working of the administration here, admittedly it was possible that he had misunderstood this too. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. The experiment could not be so very dangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr would doubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room it would still be possible to apologise and go away again, and if the inmate was asleep, which was what was probable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ; it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, for then K. F_o But," here the Superintendent interrupted himself as if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, or as if at least it were possible that he had gone too far, " doesn't the story bore you " No," said K., " it amuses me." Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not telling it to amuse you." " It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives me an insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certain circumstances may decide the life of a human being." " You havenf_Tt been given any insight into that yet,"   replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can go on with my story. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. 
But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached the original department f_" I'll call it A f_" but by mistake went to another department, B. But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. 
F_o But," here the Superintendent interrupted himself as if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, or as if at least it were possible that he had gone too far, " doesn't the story bore you " No," said K., " it amuses me." Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not telling it to amuse you." " It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives me an insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certain circumstances may decide the life of a human being." " You havenf_Tt been given any insight into that yet,"   replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can go on with my story. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. 

My instructions are only another proof of the Superintendent's kindness ; I want to emphasise that his kindness in this instance is incom- prehensible to me, and that I only carry out his in- structions because it's my duty and out of respect to the Superintendent." Washed and combed, K. Had seen in the working of the administration here, admittedly it was possible that he had misunderstood this too. 

Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there was still another and another to look at, until he let his eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- understood him at first and began to approach him, father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted hand and then waved us way.   tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. " It's only his carelessness you've got to thank for it," cried the landlady again, pointing with her forefinger at K. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. Admittedly he is not in a good state, he was not expecting the summons, hence he had gone on various errands in the village with regard to his cause, you know by this time he has more connections here than families that have been living here for centuries, all these connections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyor affair of his and, since they are the result of hard fighting and have to be fought for over and over again, an eye must be kept on them all the time. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. " Besides there's another distinction still between your case and Frieda's. In Frieda's case it didn't happen that Klamm never summoned her again, on the contrary he summoned her but she didn't obey. Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. 


Shared out the remaining work ; the assistants were to bring in wood and light the fire, but in the other classrooms first, from which another and greater danger threatened, for the teacher himself was probably already there. Once it sounded like the jubilation of children getting ready for a picnic, another time like daybreak in a hen-roost, like the joy of being in complete accord with the awakening day. Though the passage itself was still empty, the doors were already in motion, time and again one would be opened a little and quickly shut again, the passage buzzed with this opening and shutting of doors, now and then, too, in the space above the partition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling, K. But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. And if this method was not successful or if at one door this seemed to him not the right approach, he would try another method. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. But I fancy that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, what is transacted in the offices and can be construed again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices and threatened by their encroachments, which are so meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- ness of the danger. Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. Then he changed the subject, perhaps he could get at the truth from another side ; as though there had not yet been any difference of opinion, he asked calmly : All that has been written about the after- noon All these papers are concerned with that " " All of them," Momus said pleasantly, as though he had been waiting for this question, "it is my work." If one has the strength to look at things unceasingly, so to speak without blinking, one sees a great deal ,* but if one falters only once and shuts one's eyes, everything instantly slips away into darkness. They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)f_T   J customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under his arm, for the little table was knocked over the moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, solemnly, as though it must be" like this. The Land Surveyor knows how extra- ordinary his request is, but he will exert himself to make his disturbance of the Director as little felt as possible ; he submits himself to any and every limitation of time, also any stipulation which may be considered necessary as to the number of words which may be allowed him during the interview, even with ten words he believes he will be able to manage. And she actually shrank a little when the assistants got up again, partly to have a look at the food that was left, partly to get at the bottom of the continued whispering. 
Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. If she had only made some pretence of com- pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But what is all this about punishment and advocates " said K. 

Now one of them is in fashion, and most carriages go by that, now it's another and everything drives pell-mell there. Office life, in particular, is so exhausting that it can only be done if all the smallest subsidiary circumstances are carefully watched and if possible no change is pei milted in this respect. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. But you hid nothing, she repeated that again and again, and then she said afterwards : Try to listen to him carefully at the first favourable oppor- tunity, not superficially, but carefully, carefully. 
Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, even if only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult to the messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly, everything might be put right if one could propitiate the messenger. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. 
It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. Several children were playing   Aoeiroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she seemed to be of another class, although of course illness ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* ** Sit down ** said one of the men, who had a full beard and breathed heavily through his mouth A-which always hung open, pointingf_" it was a furmy sight f_" with his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as he did so. 
At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there was still another and another to look at, until he let his eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- understood him at first and began to approach him, father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted hand and then waved us way. 
Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,   he orders first one and then another to come to him, puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to go just as he ordered them to come. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. Dearest, take them back again, don't sin against him who perhaps sent them." K. Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. Finally there remained only one gentleman who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he would burst out again, no less furiously than before. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,   he orders first one and then another to come to him, puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to go just as he ordered them to come. Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. Amalia smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed again, but never so completely. Behind the village church where he had stopped f_" it was really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions so as to accommodate the parishioners f_" was the school. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. Probably you think that I'm much older than Hans, but the fact is that hef_Ts only two or three years younger than me and will never grow any older either, for at his work f_" smoking his pipe, listening to the customers, knocking out his pipe again, and fetching an occasional pot of beer f_" at that sort of work one doesnf_Tt grow old." " What youf_Tve done has been splendid," said K. 
Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather this from his appearance and his speech ; one observed it only in the confessions wormed out of him as it were after the event, by chance or by deliberation. Said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it Hansf_Ts mother would not let K. F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. So it wasn't within Sordini's power to make enquiries in other departments, besides they simply wouldn't have answered, because they would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting out a possible error." " Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with a question," said K. But I fancy that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, what is transacted in the offices and can be construed again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices and threatened by their encroachments, which are so meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- ness of the danger. 
Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. Surely you're not afraid f_" an ignorant man thinks everything possible " f_" here K. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. Hardly had I finished it when Amalia after a brief glance at me took it back, but she couldn't bring herself to read it again, and tearing it in pieces she threw the fragments in die face of the man outiade and shut the window. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there was still another and another to look at, until he let his eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- understood him at first and began to approach him, father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted hand and then waved us way. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. Before Khftnm, on the way to Klamm Was nor precisely this afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark was after all seriously underestimating the distance sepaftting him from Klamm  If it was at all possible to    reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); on this way there were also to be found, for instance, Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. 
I can only hope that theref_Ts some misunderstanding.f__ f__ No, unfortunately,f__ said the Superintendent, f__ itf_Ts as I've said.f__ f__ But how is that possible f__ cried K. 

Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. 

Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. Asked time and again, but for a long time could not get any answer because his guilt was ^ too much a matter of course to the two of them and hence it simply did not occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. Reaching her he took her by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro- perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questions with his eyes holding hers. 
Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow them down one after another to the very dregs. Now there seems to be another girl there. At eight o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that on the first road again, and then they may stick to that road all day, but every minute there's the possibility of a change. Asked time and again, but for a long time could not get any answer because his guilt was ^ too much a matter of course to the two of them and hence it simply did not occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. 



She stopped searching, saying, in exhaustion, only that it must be page ten. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 
My instructions are only another proof of the Superintendent's kindness ; I want to emphasise that his kindness in this instance is incom- prehensible to me, and that I only carry out his in- structions because it's my duty and out of respect to the Superintendent." Washed and combed, K. If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is tliere in the village to keep us But for the time being, darling, we'll accept the offer, wonf_Tt we I've fetched the teacher back again, you've only to say to him * Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." " It's a great nuisance," said K. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. 
^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. The experiment could not be so very dangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr would doubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room it would still be possible to apologise and go away again, and if the inmate was asleep, which was what was probable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ; it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, for then K. 

The little barrow stopped outside most of the doors, usually then, too, the door would open and the appropriate files, sometimes, however, only a small sheet of paperf_" in such cases a little conversation came about between the room and the passage, probab y t Ar   servant was being reproached f_" ^would be handed into the room. 
They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. But the splinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again, he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. Asked himself as if self-reproachfully, and took another sip. Only once did they start and glance back again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming and shouting, and outside whose door K. 
To go past them at long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the   bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. Never- theless, at the sight of Burgers bare chest a thought that was part his dream brushed his awareness : Here you have your Greek god I Go on, haul him out of bed There is, however,*' Btirgel said, his face thoughtfully tilted towards the ceiling, as though he were searching his memory for examples, but without being able to find any, ** there is, however, nevertheless, in spite of all precautionary measures, a way in which it is possible for the applicants to exploit this nocturnal weakness of the secretaries f_" always assuming that it is a weakness f_" to their own advantage. Now there seems to be another girl there. As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. 
She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. But, then again, of course, these opportunities are in accord with the general ^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. 
Said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it Hansf_Ts mother would not let K. To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). 

Said that he did not need any help, he had all that he required, but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible that later he might be in need of something and then he would turn to Hans, he had his address. They stopped at once, tried to pull one another away, but the one would slip immediately from the grasp of the other and soon they were both back at the window again. I have asked her, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ; I, on the other hand, though I was only three times with Klamm f_" after that he never asked me to come again, I donf_Tt know why f_" I managed to bring three presents back with me all the same, having a pre- monition that my time would be short. If new work hadnf_Tt come rushing in as ever from every side, and if your case hadnf_Tt been a very unimportant case f_" one might almost say the   least important among the unimportant f_" ^we mig^ all of us liave breathed freely again, I fancy eve Sordini himself ; Brunswick was the only one that grumbled, but that was only ridiculous. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. 

Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,   he orders first one and then another to come to him, puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to go just as he ordered them to come. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. Probably you think that I'm much older than Hans, but the fact is that hef_Ts only two or three years younger than me and will never grow any older either, for at his work f_" smoking his pipe, listening to the customers, knocking out his pipe again, and fetching an occasional pot of beer f_" at that sort of work one doesnf_Tt grow old." " What youf_Tve done has been splendid," said K. 
But, then again, of course, these opportunities are in accord with the general ^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. Said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it Hansf_Ts mother would not let K. To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). 

What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. Yet probably it's not the effect of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go to the Castle again, which he dare not do without having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing how well you grasp it all. For anybody one has forgotten can come back to one's memory again, of course. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. 

The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. Was annoyed at being ordered about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach- man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being f_~Sur- prised by Klamm in the sledge. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. 
But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. 



But when my fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran   out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at the broken door, and thatf_Ts why they say now f_" but theyf_Tre only children f__ True, the assistants kept on shaking their heads during Friedaf_Ts story, pointed again at K. Locked the door behind them they tried to get   in again, whimpered outside and knocked on the door. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. Haven't you found that out He couldn't remain another day in his post if it weren't for his wife, who runs everything." " Mizzi " asked K. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're well again, as you were at one time, before K. The experiment could not be so very dangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr would doubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room it would still be possible to apologise and go away again, and if the inmate was asleep, which was what was probable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ; it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, for then K. And from whom In the last resort from no one else but Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda " asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain we're carried farther than we realise. Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- bration and telling us his plans in connection with the Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the celebration, and there had been much discussion about it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from the village ; there were several possible candidates, but father had hopes that he would be chosen. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. 

Listen, even with only the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn the bitterness of onef_Ts life, itf_Ts made bitter for us when we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe particularly, but youf_Tll like Emilie too, I've told them abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without believing them, as though outside the room nothing could really happen, itf_Ts warm and snug and tight there, and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired   of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. In such a large governmental office as the Countf_Ts, it may occasionally happen that one department ordains this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and f_>though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it comes by its nature too late, and so every now and then a trifling miscalculation arises. 



And even thoughts like the following had occurred to Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. But how was it possible to do the cleaning quietly when the gentlemen occupied their rooms for several days on end, and the men-servants, dirty lot that they were, pottered about there into the bargain, and when the chamber-maid was finally allowed to go into the room, it was in such a state that not even the Flood could wash it clean? Now one of them is in fashion, and most carriages go by that, now it's another and everything drives pell-mell there. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. I've been taken on straight away for the taproom again, in spite of that fact that I didn't leave it with any great distinction, but, of course, I had a word put in for me. Said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it Hansf_Ts mother would not let K. 
But if it wasn't as bad as all that, if it wasn't a sly beast of prey that seized you that night, but you came to meet me, just as I went to meet you, and we found one another without a thought for ourselves, in that case, Frieda, tell me, how would things look If that were really so, in acting for myself I was acting for you too, there is no distinction here, and only an enemy could draw it. 




It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda doubtless did manage everything quite differently. Listen, even with only the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn the bitterness of onef_Ts life, itf_Ts made bitter for us when we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe particularly, but youf_Tll like Emilie too, I've told them abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without believing them, as though outside the room nothing could really happen, itf_Ts warm and snug and tight there, and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired   of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. She stopped searching, saying, in exhaustion, only that it must be page ten. But itf_Ts not of such a nature that you can simply fall on   Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged to see Klamm if I answer your questions ' when a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness of his reply. Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- bration and telling us his plans in connection with the Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the celebration, and there had been much discussion about it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from the village ; there were several possible candidates, but father had hopes that he would be chosen. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. 
When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. 
To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). You take every possibility into account ; pro- viding that you reach your end youf_Tre ready to do any- thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll    Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising f_T your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that youf_Tre his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the protestations of love for him which you know I've made, and beg him to take me on again, of course on your terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply go and beg from him in the name of K. My instructions are only another proof of the Superintendent's kindness ; I want to emphasise that his kindness in this instance is incom- prehensible to me, and that I only carry out his in- structions because it's my duty and out of respect to the Superintendent." Washed and combed, K. If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is tliere in the village to keep us But for the time being, darling, we'll accept the offer, wonf_Tt we I've fetched the teacher back again, you've only to say to him * Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." " It's a great nuisance," said K.   tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. To this Hans had another objection to make, and so the argument went on and on (). To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the   teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as daylight lasted K. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. But when my fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran   out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at the broken door, and thatf_Ts why they say now f_" but theyf_Tre only children f__ True, the assistants kept on shaking their heads during Friedaf_Ts story, pointed again at K. Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable from Gerstacker or Lasemann f_" and that must happen as soon as possible, everything depended on thatf_"then all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- avoidable. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. Decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the others were only to follow when he called them ; he adopted this policy on the one hand because he did not want the position to be compromised in advance by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking of Barnabas and the future. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. But later he stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there and spend the whole day. When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. Two old people there rose to their feet, a man and a woman, as well as another girl. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. I've been taken on straight away for the taproom again, in spite of that fact that I didn't leave it with any great distinction, but, of course, I had a word put in for me. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. What strengthened him in this assumption was the fact that sometimes, always when he happened not to be looking, the bag, having been exposed to view for long enough, was suddenly and hastily pulled into the room and the door then remained as motionless as before, the doors round about then also became quiet again, disappointed or, it might be, content that this object of constant provocation had at last been removed, but then, howeifor^ they gradually came into motion again. 

** Mizzi, my foot is beginning to throb again, we must renew the compress.** K. They stopped at once, tried to pull one another away, but the one would slip immediately from the grasp of the other and soon they were both back at the window again. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. At last they stopped before a door which was not in any way different from the others, and yet behind which, so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. And in any case even if an official stepped out of his carriage and was willing to take up the matter, how could he get any clear idea of the affair from the mumblings of a poor, tired, ageing man like father Officials are  ^ highly educated, but one-sided ; in his own depart- ment an official can grasp whole trains of thought from a single word, but let him have soriething from another department explained to him by tlJe hour, he may nod politely, but he won't understand a word of it. Whenever there had been any talk of our guilt among officials or clerks or anybody else, it was only the insult to Sortini's messenger that had always been brought up, further than that nobody dared to go. But the moment she noticed the danger of that she was ready with another method, recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. 
Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. 
^ut there was yet another disturbance. I How pleased they had all been with the dress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and when at the last moment it turned out that there was still room for another ribbon, the last dubt vanished. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. 
It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda doubtless did manage everything quite differently. If she had only made some pretence of com- pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But what is all this about punishment and advocates " said K. 
And she actually shrank a little when the assistants got up again, partly to have a look at the food that was left, partly to get at the bottom of the continued whispering. Shared out the remaining work ; the assistants were to bring in wood and light the fire, but in the other classrooms first, from which another and greater danger threatened, for the teacher himself was probably already there. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 
I've been taken on straight away for the taproom again, in spite of that fact that I didn't leave it with any great distinction, but, of course, I had a word put in for me. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. At last they stopped before a door which was not in any way different from the others, and yet behind which, so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. Reaching her he took her by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro- perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questions with his eyes holding hers. It   was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. 
Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 
For when, say, a servant that I would never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, to support him, or at least to back him up f_" for according to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-   dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some friend doesn't look after them f_" ^when things like that and a great many more were told to me, they were probably justified as warnings, but the promises that accompanied them were quite baseless. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. " You've laid my request before Klamm " " That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there    all day without being asked and so close to the desk that once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up f_" and that's forbidden f_" by lifting my hand, I was the last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm coming back again, but it was not on my account, he only wanted to have another hasty glance at something in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I still made no move, the servants almost swept me out of the door with the broom. 

When he saw them sitting like that, however, each man in his own place, not speaking to one another and without any apparent mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really wanted something from him and were only incapable of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still gazing at K. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away   ^ again, but, for the time being, she must return. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. For isn't It time for him to marry and set up house for liiinsclf And instead of that he is frittering his powers away between his handicraft and being a messenger, standing in front of th^ desk up there, on the look-out for a glance from the official who looks like Klamm, and in the end gets an old dusty letter that is no good to anyone and only causes confusion in the world." " But that is yet another and quite different question," K. Said and saw only now that Amalia was back in the room again, but far away from them, at the parentsf_T table, ft*' There she is,f__^K. 
Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow them down one after another to the very dregs. It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda doubtless did manage everything quite differently. Listen, even with only the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn the bitterness of onef_Ts life, itf_Ts made bitter for us when we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe particularly, but youf_Tll like Emilie too, I've told them abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without believing them, as though outside the room nothing could really happen, itf_Ts warm and snug and tight there, and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired   of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. What next The gentle- man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the  IJ sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the courtyard How do you come to be here ' J the gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. In this way she had more time left for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;   nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to Klamm. The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. 

Barnabas had not gone to the Castle now, but he would go in the morning, and even if that girl from the Castle did not come here, another one would. 


Who knows what would have happened if the landlady and Momus had not been K."s antagonists or at least had not dared to show that antagonism It was possible and probable that even then K. Asked himself as if self-reproachfully, and took another sip. But I fancy that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, what is transacted in the offices and can be construed again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices and threatened by their encroachments, which are so meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- ness of the danger. He can't THE CASTUF  get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is covered with columns of documents tied together, piled on top of one another ; those are only the documents that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles of papers arc continually being taken away and brought in, and all in great haste, those columns are always falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, following fast on one another, that have come to distinguish Sordini's workroom. For there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof   only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that he had left immediately after sending the messenger, which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ are fleeting. Haven't you found that out He couldn't remain another day in his post if it weren't for his wife, who runs everything." " Mizzi " asked K. He began to stammer in confusion, however, when Amalia, giving him no time to say another word, interposed with an acceptance of the invitation ; then Olga was compelled to associate herself with it. For he's reported as having one appearance when he comes into the village and another on leaving it ; after having his beer he looks different from what he does before it, when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, when he's alone he's different from when he's talking to people, and f_" what is ccJtnprehensible after all that f_" he's almost another person up in the Castle. 
As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. Amalia smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed again, but never so completely. He began to stammer in confusion, however, when Amalia, giving him no time to say another word, interposed with an acceptance of the invitation ; then Olga was compelled to associate herself with it. 
Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. 
Replied bluntly, letting his gaze wander from the assistants to #:he Superinfendent and back again, and finding on the faces of all three the same smile. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- hole with it, and said to K. WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. " Besides there's another distinction still between your case and Frieda's. 

At first tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner, and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying : In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into the stall, all of you " When they saw that she was in earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a kind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under the impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a current of night air through which they all vanished with Frieda behind them openly driving them across the courtyard into the stalls. With some idea of securing his posi- tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. 
And if this method was not successful or if at one door this seemed to him not the right approach, he would try another method. 
Before Khftnm, on the way to Klamm Was nor precisely this afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark was after all seriously underestimating the distance sepaftting him from Klamm  If it was at all possible to    reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); on this way there were also to be found, for instance, Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. And what good were these inspirations, however brilliant None of them could be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, and even if they had been put to Amalia they would have met with nothing but silence. Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klammf_Ts mistress, throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the lowest of the low. Now you can perhaps refuse \\'hat you aic given, I donf_Tt know for sure, perhaps \'ou can rchf^e but if you have once accepted it, then upon it anJ  consequently upon you too there weighs the pressure of the authorities ; only if the authorities so \sf_Till can it be taken from you again, and in no other manner. Dearest, take them back again, don't sin against him who perhaps sent them." K. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. XVI W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly in the darkness that a little farther along the assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep into the room through the drawn blinds. 
  tentatively producing the hascl switch again, which he had concealed b^ind his back. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. 
F_o I'm glad you've come.f__ f__ Well,f__ he said, after another pause, f__ you've come very late, youf_Tre very slack.f__ f__ It was a long way to come,f__ said one of them. Considered this interest of hers a favourable sign f_" " have you found hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go  JOO there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. But another came all right, a man whom I hate. What strengthened him in this assumption was the fact that sometimes, always when he happened not to be looking, the bag, having been exposed to view for long enough, was suddenly and hastily pulled into the room and the door then remained as motionless as before, the doors round about then also became quiet again, disappointed or, it might be, content that this object of constant provocation had at last been removed, but then, howeifor^ they gradually came into motion again. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. With his eyes from the distance, naturally enough, for apart from the school-children there was not another human being in sight. But the steam was coming from another :orner, where in a wooden tub larger than any K. She stopped searching, saying, in exhaustion, only that it must be page ten. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. Then he changed the subject, perhaps he could get at the truth from another side ; as though there had not yet been any difference of opinion, he asked calmly : All that has been written about the after- noon All these papers are concerned with that " " All of them," Momus said pleasantly, as though he had been waiting for this question, "it is my work." If one has the strength to look at things unceasingly, so to speak without blinking, one sees a great deal ,* but if one falters only once and shuts one's eyes, everything instantly slips away into darkness. They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)f_T   J customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under his arm, for the little table was knocked over the moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, solemnly, as though it must be" like this. I say apparently, for we never heard another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before then, from that day on he might as well have been dead. 


This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. 
Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great   scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way she had become new to people, they might have liked to sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting K., come to have charm for them again, of course they would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary bar-maid. If Frieda had stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no longer be possible to drive Pepi out, Ahe would be bar- maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in the most dazzling style, only one or two moreA- days and Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable and, if he noticed Friedaf_Ts absence at all, would be highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly and completely forgotten, never would she come out into the open again. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. Said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it is true i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemannf_Ts, but I prefer to stay with you people.*f_T ** At Lasemannf_Ts " Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then itf_Ts a misunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one who was at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once " K. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. 
The others in the village were only   waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when they broke with us they thought they were only doing their duty, in their place we should have done just the same. But that, again, need not be taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in his life been as tired as K. F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. In such a large governmental office as the Countf_Ts, it may occasionally happen that one department ordains this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and f_>though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it comes by its nature too late, and so every now and then a trifling miscalculation arises. It turned out at length, however, that it wasnf_Tt really the Castle he was thinking of, but the daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so he got the girl and was all right again.f__ f__ I think I would like that man,f__ said K. Now one of them is in fashion, and most carriages go by that, now it's another and everything drives pell-mell there. Now there seems to be another girl there. Nevertheless we are obliged to keep such a watch over Klamm's comft)rt that we remove even disturbances that are not sucli for him f_" and probably there are none whatsoever for him f_" if they strike us as being possible disturbances. The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from arising.** f_o Well, yes,** K. Barnabas had not gone to the Castle now, but he would go in the morning, and even if that girl from the Castle did not come here, another one would. Was already in tlic hall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again, when the landlady shouted after him : f_o I am getting a new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send for you. Admittedly he is not in a good state, he was not expecting the summons, hence he had gone on various errands in the village with regard to his cause, you know by this time he has more connections here than families that have been living here for centuries, all these connections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyor affair of his and, since they are the result of hard fighting and have to be fought for over and over again, an eye must be kept on them all the time. But seeing tliat the lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. If the classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed had to be opened ; I didnf_Tt dare to ask you for the key in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so I had to decide for myself. Exasperated by all this circumlocution, and more irritated than touched by Frieda's tearful, complaining voice f_" but annoyed above all because the landlady was coming into his affairs again, though only as a recollection, for in person she had had little success up till now f_" K. 

" It's only his carelessness you've got to thank for it," cried the landlady again, pointing with her forefinger at K. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. But another came all right, a man whom I hate. When two who are accus- tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his tea to come, can't possibly understand. Was already in tlic hall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again, when the landlady shouted after him : f_o I am getting a new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send for you. 
But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher aied amid the laughter of the children, which from now on never stopped : ** Slept well and as K. F_~f_~ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but as if beneath her words she were carrying on another conversation with K. She only remained there for a moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. F__ Surely I havenf_Tt made this endless journey just to be sent back again.f__ f__ Thatf_Ts another question,f__ replied the Superintendent, f__ which isnf_Tt for me to decide, but how this misunder- standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. In such a large governmental office as the Countf_Ts, it may occasionally happen that one department ordains this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and f_>though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it comes by its nature too late, and so every now and then a trifling miscalculation arises. I admit I hadn't my father's great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that men have, I confined myself to making good the insult to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty of my attempt should be put to my credit. We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us   to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried on by him, and the other messenger might remain quietly in retirement as long asA-he liked, for as long a time as he needed to forget the insult I was quite aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal question, or that we doubted their ability to make the best arrangements, which they might have made long before we had struck upon the idea that something could be done. Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super- cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyes for a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'s senseless stupidity to his own sound reason again, ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly parted lips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the horses." Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side- glance at K., the coachman had now to get down in spite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly f_" as if he did not so much expect a counter-order from the gentleman as a sensible remark from K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. The officials preferred indeed to get through their business in the taproom or in their rooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bed before retiring for the night, or in the morning when they were too weary to get up and wanted to stretch themselves for a little longer. Then he heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. But so, to the gentle- man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. Locked the door behind them they tried to get   in again, whimpered outside and knocked on the door. The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. I knew that they never had much inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they always changed the subject, and that every word had to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of truth could be picked up. But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow them down one after another to the very dregs. As for me, if it came to the worst, I could really always find a lodging for the night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting her hand over his mouth. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. Could have gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled old folks from attempting to meander through the room, which she did with a few words. 
Amalia smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed again, but never so completely. Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he stopped asking to come. Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. 
The messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one might easily find our man among the servants of another gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, still one might perhaps get news of him from the other servants. Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has hardly had time to look round before the chance is there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; but in another case one may have to wait for even more years than the official employees, and after being a semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. I don't deny that it's' possible once in a while to achieve something in the teeth of every rule and tradition. The landlady looked at him in silence, and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : There's something else to take away with you, for whatever you say and however you insult an old woman like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as though K. Before Khftnm, on the way to Klamm Was nor precisely this afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark was after all seriously underestimating the distance sepaftting him from Klamm  If it was at all possible to    reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); on this way there were also to be found, for instance, Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. 
Youf_Tve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, you donf_Tt know our day customers ; at that time there were more of them, many of them have stopped coming since. 
And as I hadn't asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back again, and like you, I would much rather have done it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you wouldn't have it any other way. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. 
For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. The sight of them, if they were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, the way they would hop round like children and stretch out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I would be able to stand that. Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow them down one after another to the very dregs. They all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the receiver once more. Would have done better to visit his native town again, which he had not seen for such a long time. They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)f_T   J customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under his arm, for the little table was knocked over the moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, solemnly, as though it must be" like this. Our relatives stopped sending us things, our money was almost done, and that was the time when people first began to despise us in the way you can see now. Perhaps f_" it would be a bad thing, but it is possible f_" perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when I marry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I am free, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thijA- visit of mine to you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but I am still free, I can still, if something seems to me as important as Barnabasf_Ts affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it as exhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. They permit only subject^ of negotiation from which there is in every sense as little as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,   Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. I How pleased they had all been with the dress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and when at the last moment it turned out that there was still room for another ribbon, the last dubt vanished. In such a large governmental office as the Countf_Ts, it may occasionally happen that one department ordains this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and f_>though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it comes by its nature too late, and so every now and then a trifling miscalculation arises. 
The little barrow stopped outside most of the doors, usually then, too, the door would open and the appropriate files, sometimes, however, only a small sheet of paperf_" in such cases a little conversation came about between the room and the passage, probab y t Ar   servant was being reproached f_" ^would be handed into the room. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the threshold, they could not understand how anyone should only need to open the door in order to gain possession of his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even possible that files that were never picked up at all might later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who Wf_Tcre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent peering out, whether the files were still lying on the threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 
But, then again, of course, these opportunities are in accord with the general ^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached the original department f_" I'll call it A f_" but by mistake went to another department, B. Did not look back again, he thought he had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. To the Superintendent on the next day during official hours to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, and who would probably be leaving the place in another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen and he found some work in the village, only for a day or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. The only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully discontented with all you've done ^ready Only take a look round and see whether any of our neighboun has got on so well as you. " In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landlady said, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by   accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that time deputising for the head of anotlier department, thatf_Ts why it says : f_~ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.f_T I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrarf_Ts office with* the document, didnf_Tt even take off my wedditig- dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document, read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildish eagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate the signature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers of paper with writing, and never noticed that Hans was standing behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, and watching me at my work. Frieda herself does not understand how it comes about that there is room in her heart for me too, and she can only think that it became possible solely by your will. Asked himself as if self-reproachfully, and took another sip. In Frieda's case it didn't happen that Klamm never summoned her again, on the contrary he summoned her but she didn't obey. Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, even if only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult to the messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly, everything might be put right if one could propitiate the messenger. When  told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; for one thing he was convinced f_" this happened during his illness f_" that we had always held him back from final success, first by stopping his allowance and then by keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no   longer capable of completely understanding any new idea. Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super- cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyes for a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'s senseless stupidity to his own sound reason again, ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly parted lips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the horses." Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side- glance at K., the coachman had now to get down in spite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly f_" as if he did not so much expect a counter-order from the gentleman as a sensible remark from K. The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. " He comes very seldom, and what messages he brings are of no importance ; only the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now IS much worse, that's something which not even the landlady foresaw. Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather this from his appearance and his speech ; one observed it only in the confessions wormed out of him as it were after the event, by chance or by deliberation. Wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. 
WaA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying : f_o One thing more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you An absurd idea. Replied bluntly, letting his gaze wander from the assistants to #:he Superinfendent and back again, and finding on the faces of all three the same smile. 
If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is tliere in the village to keep us But for the time being, darling, we'll accept the offer, wonf_Tt we I've fetched the teacher back again, you've only to say to him * Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." " It's a great nuisance," said K. It was up to him, therefore, to appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, however, to disappear again, if possible even more quickly. For anybody one has forgotten can come back to one's memory again, of course. Yet in reality everything has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as you complain, and because he really feels as if he were lost f_" without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I know that much about him already f_" it*s just as true that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would be happier with another wife, and by happier I mean more independent, industrious, manly. 


The coachman remained for a while still in the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with concentration, evidently without any hope of starting soon again, and this silent absorption which did not spare a single side-glance for K. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know yet who I am. 
For look here, if you find another possibility, even this afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. In connection with that I want to say further that we must insist on your relations with  Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible moment. If a decision should be come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate you again, Til send for you. ** Mizzi, my foot is beginning to throb again, we must renew the compress.** K. This girl had something to tell him about another girl he also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed f_" it was not yet midnight f_" for it is his principle never to miss any opportunity of learning anything new. This, indeed, besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this time, for instance, for, when he got away from the gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was out in the passage again, it was four of_Tclock. 
